The following is a conversation with
Joel David Hamkins, a mathematician and
philosopher specializing in set theory,
the foundation of mathematics, and the
nature of infinity.
He is the number one highest rated user
on MathOverflow, which I think is a
legendary accomplishment. MathOverflow,
by the way, is like Stack Overflow, but
for research mathematicians.
He is also the author of several books,
including Proof and the Art of
Mathematics and Lectures on the
Philosophy of Mathematics.
And he has a great blog,
infinitelymore.xyz.
This is a super technical
super fun conversation about the
foundation of modern mathematics and
some mind-bending ideas about infinity,
nature of reality, truth, and the
mathematical paradoxes that challenged
some of the greatest minds of the 20th
century.
I have been hiding from the world a bit,
reading, thinking, writing,
soul-searching, as we all do every once
in a while, but mostly just deeply
focused on work and preparing mentally
for some challenging travel I plan to
take on in the new year.
Through all of it, a recurring thought
comes to me,
how damn lucky I am to be alive and to
get to experience so much love from
folks across the world.
I want to take this moment to say thank
you
from the bottom of my heart for
everything, for your support, for the
many amazing conversations I've had with
people across the world.
I got a little bit of hate
and a whole lot of love,
and I wouldn't have it any other way.
I'm grateful for all of it.
This is the Lex Fridman podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description,
where you can also find ways to contact
me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends,
here's Joel David Hamkins.
Some infinities are bigger than others.
This idea from Cantor at the end of the
19th century, I think it's fair to say,
broke mathematics before rebuilding it.
And I also read that this was a
devastating and transformative discovery
for several reasons. So, one, it created
a theological crisis, because infinity
is associated with God. How could there
be multiple infinities? And also, Cantor
was deeply religious himself. Second,
there was a kind of mathematical civil
war. The leading German mathematician
Kronecker called Cantor a corrupter of
youth and tried to block his career.
Third, many fascinating paradoxes
emerged from this, like Russell's
paradox about the set of all sets that
don't contain themselves.
And those threatened to make all of
mathematics inconsistent. And finally,
on the psychological side and the
personal side, Cantor's own breakdown.
He literally went mad, spending his
final years in and out of sanatoriums,
obsessed with proving the continuum
hypothesis. So, laying that all out on
the table, can you explain the idea of
infinity
that some infinities are larger than
others, and why was this so
transformative to mathematics? Well,
that's a really great question.
I would want to start talking about
infinity and telling the story much
earlier than Cantor, actually, because
I mean, you can go all the way back to
ancient Greek times, when Aristotle
emphasized the potential aspect of
infinity, as opposed to the
impossibility, according to him, of
achieving an actual infinity. And
Archimedes' method of exhaustion, where
he is trying to understand the the area
of a region by carving it into more and
more triangles, say, and sort of
exhausting the area, and thereby
understanding the total area in terms of
the sum of the areas of the pieces that
he put into it.
And it proceeded on this kind of
potential under this potentialist
understanding of infinity for for
hundreds of years, thousands of years.
Uh almost all mathematicians were
potentialists only and thought that it
was incoherent to speak of an actual
infinity at all. Um Galileo is an
extremely
prominent exception to this, though he
argued against this sort of potentialist
orthodoxy in the Dialogue of Two New
Sciences, really lovely account there
that he gave. Um and that
the
In many ways, Galileo was anticipating
Cantor's developments, except he
couldn't quite push it all the way
through and
ended up throwing up his hands in
confusion,
in in a sense. I mean, the Galileo
paradox is the idea or the observation
that if you think about the natural
numbers, I would start with zero, but I
think maybe he would start with one, the
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. And you
think about which of those numbers are
perfect squares. So, 0² is 0, and 1² is
1, and 2² is 4, 3² is 9, 16, 25, and so
on. And Galileo observed that
the the perfect squares can be put into
a one-to-one correspondence with all of
the numbers. I mean, we just did it. I
associated every number with its square.
And so, it seems like, on the basis of
this one-to-one correspondence, that
there should be exactly the same number
of
squares, perfect squares, as there are
numbers. And yet, there's all the gaps
in between the perfect squares, right?
And and this suggests that uh you know,
there should be fewer perfect squares,
more numbers than squares, because the
numbers include all the squares plus a
lot more in between them, right?
And Galileo was quite troubled by this
observation, because
he took it to cause a kind of
incoherence in the comparison of
infinite quantities, right? And another
example is if you take two line segments
of different lengths,
and you can imagine drawing a kind of
foliation, a fan of lines that connect
them. So, the endpoints are matched from
the shorter to the longer segment, and
the midpoints are matched, and so on.
So, spreading out the lines as you go.
And so, every point on the shorter line
would be associated with a unique,
distinct point on the longer line in a
one-to-one way. And so, it seems like
the two line segments have the same
number of points on them because of
that, even though the longer one is
longer, and so it makes again a kind of
confusion over ideas about infinity.
And also, with two circles, if you just
place them concentrically
and draw the rays from the center, then
every point on the smaller circle is
associated with a corresponding point on
the larger circle, you know, in a
one-to-one way. And and again, that
seems to show that the smaller circle
has the same number of points on it as
the larger one, precisely because they
can be put into this one-to-one
correspondence. Now, of course, the
contemporary attitude about this
situation is that those two infinities
are are exactly the same, and that
Galileo was right in those observations
about the equinumerosity. And the way we
would talk about it now is appeal to
what what I call the Cantor-Hume
principle, or some people just call it
Hume's principle,
which is the idea that if you have two
collections, whether they're finite or
infinite, then we want to say that those
two collections have the same size,
they're equinumerous,
if and only if there's a one-to-one
correspondence between those
collections. And so, Galileo was
observing that line segments of
different lengths are equinumerous, and
the perfect squares are equinumerous
with the whole all of the natural
numbers, and and two any two circles are
equinumerous, and so on. And that the
tension between the Cantor-Hume
principle and what could be called
Euclid's principle, which is that the
whole is always greater than the part,
which is a principle that Euclid
appealed to in in the Elements. I mean,
many times when he's calculating area
and so on, he wants it's a kind of basic
idea that if something is just a part of
another thing, then the the whole is
greater than the part.
And so, what Galileo was troubled by was
this tension between
what we call the Cantor-Hume principle
and Euclid's principle.
And it really wasn't fully resolved, I
think, until Cantor. He's the one who
really
explained so clearly about these
different sizes of infinity and so on,
in a way that was so compelling. And so,
he exhibited two different infinite sets
and proved that they're not
equinumerous. They can't be put into
one-to-one correspondence.
And it's traditional to talk about the
uncountability of the real numbers. So,
Cantor's big result was that the set of
all real numbers is an uncountable set.
So, maybe if we're going to talk about
countable sets, then I would suggest
that we talk about Hilbert's Hotel,
which really makes that idea perfectly
clear.
>> Yeah, let's talk about the Hilbert's
Hotel. Hilbert's Hotel with infinitely
many rooms. You know, each room is a
full floor suite. So, there's
floor zero. I always start with zero,
because for me, the natural numbers
start with zero, although that's maybe a
point of contention for some
mathematicians. The The other
mathematicians are wrong. Like a bunch
of Java programmers are starting at zero
as a wonderful place to start.
>> Exactly.
So, there's floor zero, floor one, floor
two, or room zero, one, two, three, and
so on, just like the natural numbers.
So, Hilbert's hotel has a room for every
natural number.
And it's completely full. There's a
person occupying room n for every n.
But, meanwhile, a new guest comes up to
the desk and wants a room. Can I have a
room, please?
And the manager says, "Hang on a second.
Just give me a moment."
And you see, when the other guests had
checked in, they had to sign an
agreement with
uh with the hotel that maybe there would
be some changing of the rooms, you know,
during the stay.
And so, the manager sent a message up to
all the current occupants and told every
person, "Hey, can you move up one room,
please?"
So, the person in room five would move
to room six, and the person in room six
would move to room seven, and so on, and
everyone would move
at the same time.
And of course, we never want to be
placing two different guests in the same
room, and we want want everyone to have
their own private room, and but when you
move everyone up one room, then the
bottom room, room zero, becomes
available, of course. And so, he can put
the new guest in that room.
So, even when you have infinitely many
things, then
the new guest can be accommodated. And
that's a way of showing how
the particular infinity of the occupants
of Hilbert's hotel it violates Euclid's
principle. I mean, it exactly
illustrates this idea because
adding one more element to a set didn't
make it larger because we can still have
a one-to-one correspondence between the
total new guests and the old guests by
the room number, right? So, to just uh
say one more time, the hotel is full.
The hotel is full. And then you could
still squeeze in one more, and that
breaks
the
uh traditional notion of mathematics,
and and breaks people's brains about
when they try to think about infinity, I
suppose. This is a property of infinity.
>> It's a property of infinity that
sometimes, when you add up an element to
a set, it doesn't get larger. That's
what this example shows.
But, one can go on with Hilbert's hotel,
for example. Uh I mean, maybe the next
day, you know, 20 people show up all at
once. But, we can easily do the same
trick again. Just move everybody up 20
rooms.
And then we would have 20 empty rooms at
the bottom, and those new 20 guests
could go in.
But, on the following weekend,
a giant bus pulled up, Hilbert's bus.
And Hilbert's bus
has, of course, infinitely many seats.
There's seat zero, seat one, seat two,
seat three, and so on.
And so, one wants to
uh you know, all the people on the bus
want to check into the hotel, but the
hotel is completely full. And so, what
is the manager going to do?
And when I talk about Hilbert's hotel in
when I teach Hilbert's hotel in in
class,
demand that the students provide, you
know, the explanation of of how to do
it. So, maybe I'll ask you. Can you tell
me Yeah, what is your idea about how to
fit them all in the hotel, everyone on
the bus, and also the current occupants?
Uh you
uh
you separate the hotel into even and odd
rooms, and you squeeze in the new
Hilbert bus people into the odd rooms,
and the previous occupants go into the
even rooms.
>> That's exactly right. So, I mean, that's
the a very uh easy way to do it. If you
just tell all the current guests to
double their room number,
so in room n, you move to room two times
n.
So, they're all going to get their own
private room, the new room, and it will
always be an even number cuz two times n
is always an even number.
And so, all the odd rooms become empty
that way, and now we can put the bus
occupants into the odd-numbered rooms.
And by doing so, you have now shoved in
an infinity into another infinity.
>> That's right. So, what it really shows,
I mean, another way of thinking about
it,
is that well, we can define that a set
is countable if it is equinumerous with
a set of natural numbers. And and a kind
of
easy way to understand what that's
saying in terms of Hilbert's hotel is
that
a set is countable if it fits into
Hilbert's hotel cuz Hilbert's hotel
basically is the set of natural numbers
in terms of the room numbers. So, to be
equinumerous with a set of natural
numbers is just the same thing as to fit
into Hilbert's hotel.
And so, what we've shown is that
if you have two countably infinite sets,
then their union is also countably
infinite. If you put them together and
form a new set with all of the elements
of either of them,
then that union set is still
only countably infinite. It didn't get
bigger.
And that's a remarkable property for uh
a a notion of infinity to have, I
suppose.
But, if you thought that there was only
one
kind of infinity, then it wouldn't be
surprising at all because if you take
two infinite sets and put them together,
then it's still infinite. And so, if
there were only one kind of infinity,
then it shouldn't be surprising that the
union of two countable sets is
countable. So, there's another way to
push this a bit harder, and that is when
uh
when Hilbert's train
arrives. And Hilbert's train has
infinitely many train cars, Mhm. and
each train car has infinitely many
seats. Mhm.
And so, we have an infinity of
infinities of the train passengers
together with the current occupants of
the hotel, and everybody on the train
wants to check into Hilbert's hotel.
So, the manager can again, of course,
send a message up to all the rooms
uh telling every person to double their
room number again. And so, that will
occupy all the even-numbered rooms
again, and but free up again the
odd-numbered rooms. So, somehow we want
to put the train passengers into the
odd-numbered rooms.
And so, well, every train passenger is
on some car, let's say car c and seat s.
So, somehow we have to take these two
coordinates, you know, c  s, the
car number and the seat number,
and produce from it an odd number in a
one-to-one way, you know.
And that's that's actually not very
difficult. In fact, uh
one can just use, say, an easy way to do
it is
to just use the number
three to the c times five to the s.
Three to the c, three to the car number,
so three times three times three,
you know, the number of the car. You
multiply three by itself the number of
the train car, and then you multiply
five by itself the seat number times,
and then you multiply those two numbers
together. So, three to the c times five
to the s.
That's always an odd number cuz the
prime factorization has only threes and
fives in it. There's no two there.
So, therefore, it's definitely an odd
number. And it's always different
because of the uniqueness of prime
factorization.
So, every number can be factored
uniquely into primes. So, if you have a
number of that form, then you can just
factor it, and that tells you the
exponent on three and the exponent on
five. And so, you know exactly which
person it was, which car they came from,
and which seat they came from.
>> And prime factorization is every single
number
can be
uh
uh decomposed into the atoms of
mathematics, which is the prime numbers.
You can multiply them together to
achieve that number. And that's prime
factorization. You're showing three and
five are both prime numbers.
Odd.
So, through this magical formula, you
can uh deal with this
train infinite number of cars
with each car having infinite number of
seats. Exactly right. We've proved that
if you have countably many countable
sets,
then the union of those sets,
putting all those sets together into one
giant set, is still countable. Yeah, cuz
the the train cars are each countable,
plus the current hotel is sort of like
another train car, if you want to think
about it that way. The current occupants
of the hotel could, you know, have the
same number as as any of the train cars.
So, putting countably many countable
sets together to make one big union set
is still countable. It's quite
remarkable, I think.
Um I mean, when I first learned this
many, many years ago, I was completely
shocked by it and transfixed by it. It
was quite amazing to me that this notion
of countable infinity could be closed
under this process of
infinitely many infinities adding up
still to the very same infinity,
which is a strong instance, a strong
violation of Euclid's principle, once
again, right? So, the new set that we
built is has many more elements than the
old set in the sense that there's
additional elements, but it doesn't have
many more elements in terms of its size
because it's still just a countable
infinity, and it fits into Hilbert's
hotel.
Uh have you been able to sort of
internalize a good intuition about
countable infinity?
Cuz that is a pretty weird thing.
You can have a countably infinite set of
countably infinite sets. So, you can
shove it all in, and it still is a
countable infinite set.
>> Yeah, that's that's exactly right. I
mean, I guess
of course, when you when you work with
these notions that
the the argument of of Hilbert's hotel
becomes kind of clear. There's many,
many other ways to talk about it, too.
For example, uh
let's think about, say, the the integer
lattice, the grid of points that you get
by taking pairs of natural numbers, say.
So, the the upper right quadrant of the
integer lattice, yeah.
So, there's the, you know, row zero, row
one, row two, and so on, column zero,
column one, column two, and so on. And
each
each row and column has an countable
infinity of points on it, right?
So, those dots, if you think about them
as dots, are really the same as the
train cars if you think about each
column of in the in that integer
lattice, it's a countable infinity. It's
like one train car and then there's the
next train car next to it and then the
next column next to that, the next train
car.
And so, but if we think about it in this
grid manner, then I can imagine a a kind
of winding path winding through these
grid points like up and down the
diagonals winding back and forth. So, I
start at the corner point and then I go
down up into the left and then down into
the right up into the left down into the
right and so on.
In such a way that I'm going to hit
every grid point in on this path.
So, this gives me a way of assigning
room numbers to the points because every
every grid point is going to be the nth
point on that path for some n and that
that gives a correspondence between the
grid points and the natural numbers
themselves.
So, it's a kind of different picture. I
mean, before we use this three to this C
five times five to the S, which is a
kind of, you know,
overly arithmetic way to think about it,
but there's a kind of direct, you know,
way to understand that it's still a
countable infinity when you have
countably many countable sets because
you can just start putting them on this
list and as long as you give each of the
infinite collections a chance to add one
more person to the list, then you're
going to accommodate everyone in any of
the sets in one list. Yeah, it's a
really nice visual way to think about
it. You just zigzag your way across the
grid
to make sure everybody's included. That
gives you kind of an algorithm for
including everybody. So, can you speak
to the uncountable infinity? So, what
are the integers and the real numbers
and what is the line that Cantor was
able to find? So, maybe there's there's
one more step I want to insert before
doing that, which is
the rational numbers. So, we did we did
pairs of natural numbers.
>> Mhm.
Right, that that's the train car,
basically. But maybe it's a little bit
informative to think about the rational,
the fractions, the set of fractions or
rational numbers
because a lot of people maybe have an
expectation that maybe this is a bigger
infinity because the rational numbers
are
are densely ordered. Between any two
fractions, you can find another
fraction, right? The average of two
fractions is another fraction.
And so, so sometimes people
it seems to be a different character
than um than the integers, which are
discretely ordered, right? From every
any integer, there's a next one and a
previous one and so on, but that's not
true in the rational numbers.
And yet, the rational numbers are also
still only a countable infinity. And the
the way to see that is actually
it's just exactly the same as Hilbert's
train again because every fraction
consists of two integers, the numerator
and the denominator. And so, if I tell
you two natural numbers, then
you know what fraction I'm talking
about. I mean, plus the sign issue.
I mean, if it's positive or negative,
but if you just think about the positive
fractions, then
you know, you have the numbers of the
form P over Q, where Q is not zero. So,
you can still do three to the P times
five to the Q. It's the same idea works
with the rational numbers. So, this is
still a countable set. And you might
think, well, every every set
is going to be countable because there's
only one infinity. I mean, if that's a
kind of perspective maybe that you're um
adopting, but it's not true and that's
the profound achievement that Cantor
made is proving that the set of real
numbers is not a countable infinity.
It's a strictly larger infinity and
therefore there are uh there's more than
one concept of infinity, more than one
size of infinity. So, let's talk about
the real numbers. What are the real
numbers and why did they break infinity,
the countable infinity? Right. I'm
looking it up on Perplexity.
Uh real numbers include all the numbers
that can be represented on the number
line, encompassing both rational and
irrational numbers. We've spoken about
the rational numbers and the rational
numbers, by the way, are by definition
the numbers that can be represented as a
fraction
of two integers. That's right. So, with
the real numbers, we have the algebraic
numbers. We have, of course, all the
rational numbers. The integers and the
rationals are all part of the real
number system, but then also we have the
algebraic numbers like the square root
of two or the cube root of five and so
on. Numbers that solve an algebraic
equation over the integers, those are
known as algebraic numbers.
It was an open question for a long time
whether that was all of the um real
numbers or whether there would exist
numbers that are the transcendental
numbers. The transcendental numbers are
real numbers that are not algebraic. And
we won't even go to the surreal numbers
about which I have a wonderful blog
post. We'll talk about that a little bit
later.
>> Oh, great. So, it was Liouville who
first proved that there are
transcendental numbers and he exhibited
as a very specific number that's now
known as the Liouville constant, which
is a transcendental number. Cantor also
famously proved that there are many,
many
transcendental numbers. In fact, it
follows from his argument on the
uncountability of the real numbers that
there are uncountably many
transcendental numbers. So, most real
numbers are transcendental. And again,
going to Perplexity, transcendental
numbers are real or complex numbers that
are not the root of any non-zero
polynomial with integer or rational
coefficients. This means they cannot be
expressed as solutions to algebraic
equations with integer coefficients,
setting them apart from algebraic
numbers. That's right.
So, some of the famous transcendental
numbers would include the number pi, you
know, the the
3.14159265
and so on. Uh
so, that's a transcendental number.
Also, Euler's constant, the E, like E to
the X, the exponential function. So, you
could say that some of the sexiest
numbers in mathematics are all
transcendental numbers.
>> Absolutely, that's true. Yeah, yeah.
Although, you know, I know the square
root of two is pretty is quite all
right.
So, it depends. Let's not Beauty can be
found in all in all the different kinds
of sets, but yeah.
>> And if you have a kind of simplicity
attitude, then, you know, zero and one
are looking pretty good, too. So, and
they're definitely not.
>> Sorry to take that tangent, but what is
your favorite number? Do you have one?
>> Oh, gosh. You know, Is it zero?
>> Did you know there's a proof that
every number is interesting.
You can prove that
because Yeah, what's that proof look
like? How do you even begin?
>> I'm going to prove to you that every
natural number is interesting, okay?
Yeah. I mean, zero is interesting
because, you know, it's the additive
identity, right? That's pretty
interesting. And one is the
multiplicative identity, so when you
multiply it by any other number, you
just get that number back, right?
And two is, you know, the the first
prime number, that's super interesting,
right? And
Okay. So, one can go on this way and and
give specific reasons, but I want to
prove as a general principle that every
number is interesting. And and this is
the proof.
Um suppose toward contradiction that
there were some boring numbers.
Okay.
Uh
>> But if if there was an uninteresting
number,
>> Yes. then there would have to be a
smallest uninteresting number.
>> Mhm.
Yes.
But that's a contradiction because the
smallest uninteresting number is a super
interesting property to have.
[Laughter]
So, therefore, there cannot be there
cannot be any boring numbers. I'm going
to have to try to find a hole in that
proof.
Cuz there's a lot of big tin in the word
interesting, but yeah, that's a
beautiful that's beautiful.
That doesn't say anything about the
transcendental numbers, about the real
numbers. You just proved from just for
natural numbers. Okay. So, should we get
back to Cantor's argument or
>> Sure, you've masterfully avoided the
question. You basically said, I love all
numbers.
>> Yeah, basically, yeah. That's what I my
>> Back to Cantor's argument. Let's go.
>> Okay. So, Cantor wants to prove that the
infinity of the real numbers is
different and strictly larger than
the infinity of the natural numbers. So,
the natural numbers are the numbers that
start with zero and and add one
successively, so zero, one, two, three,
and so on.
And the real numbers, as we said, are
the the numbers that come from the
number line, including all the integers
and the rationals and the algebraic
numbers and the transcendental numbers
and all of those numbers all together.
Now, obviously, since the natural
numbers are included in the real
numbers, we know that the real numbers
are at least as large as the natural
numbers. And so, the claim that we want
to prove is that
it's strictly larger.
So, suppose that it wasn't strictly
larger.
So, then they would have the same size.
But to have the same size, remember,
means by definition that there's a
one-to-one correspondence between them.
So, we suppose that the real numbers can
be put into one-to-one correspondence
with the natural numbers.
So, therefore, for every natural number
n, we have a real number, let's call it
r sub n.
r sub n is the nth real number on the
list. Basically, our assumption allows
us to think of the real numbers as
having been placed on a list, r1, r2,
and so on. Okay. And now now I'm going
to define the number z and it's going to
be
the integer part is going to be a zero
and then I'm going to put a decimal
place and then I'm going to start
specifying the digits of this number z.
d1, d2, d3, and so on. And what I'm
going to make sure is that the nth digit
after the decimal point of z is
different from the nth digit
of the nth number on the list. Okay? So,
so, to specify the nth digit of z, I go
to the nth number on the list, r sub n,
and I look at its nth digit after the
decimal point.
And whatever that digit is, I make sure
that my digit is different from it.
Okay?
And then I want to do something a little
bit more and that is uh
I'm going to make it different in a way
that I I'm never using the digits zero
or nine. I'm just always using
the the other digits and not zero or
nine. This has a certain technical
reason to do that.
But the main thing is that I make the
digits of Z different
in the nth place from the nth digit of
the nth number.
If you had If you had drawn out the
numbers uh on the original list R1, R2,
R3 and so on and you made it, you know,
and they were each filling a whole row
and you thought about the nth digit of
the nth number,
it would form a kind of diagonal going
down and to the right. And that for that
reason this argument is called the
diagonal argument because we're looking
at the nth digit of the nth number and
those exist on a kind of diagonal going
down.
And we've made our number Z
so that the nth digit of Z is different
from the nth digit of the nth number.
But now it follows that Z is not
on the list because
Z is different from R1 because
well, the the first digit after the
decimal point of Z is different from the
first digit of R1 after the decimal
point. That's exactly how we built it.
And the second digit of Z is different
from the second digit of R2.
And so on. The nth digit of Z is
different from the nth digit of R sub n
for every n. So therefore Z is not equal
to any of these numbers R sub n.
And
but that's a contradiction because we
had assumed that we had every real
number on the list, but yet here is a
real number Z that's not on the list.
Okay?
And so that's the main contradiction.
And so it's a kind of proof by
construction. Exactly. So given a list
of numbers, Cantor's proving
that it's interesting that you say that
actually because there's a kind of
philosophical controversy that occurs as
a
uh uh in connection with this
observation about whether Cantor's
construction is constructive or not.
Um given a list of numbers, Cantor gives
us a specific means of constructing a
real number that's not on the list is a
way of thinking about it.
There's this one aspect which I alluded
to earlier, but some real numbers have
more than one decimal representation
and it causes this slight problem in the
argument.
Um
for example, the number one,
you can write it as 1.0000 forever, but
you can also write it
as 0.999
forever. Those two Those are two
different decimal representations of
exactly the same number. And then you
beautifully got rid of the zeros and the
nines, therefore we don't need to even
consider that and the proof still
works.
>> Exactly. Cuz the only kind of case where
that phenomenon occurs is when the
number is eventually zero or eventually
nine. And so since
our number Z never had any zeros or
nines in it, it wasn't one of those
numbers. And so actually in those cases
we didn't need to do anything special to
diagonalize. Just the mere fact that our
number has a unique representation
already means that it's not equal to
those numbers.
So maybe it was controversial in
Cantor's day more than 100 years ago,
but I think it's most commonly looked at
today as, you know, one of the initial
main results in set theory and it's
profound and amazing and insightful and
the beginning point of so many later
arguments and this diagonalization idea
has proved to be an extremely fruitful
proof method and almost every major
result in mathematical logic is
using in an abstract way the idea of
diagonalization. It was really um the
start of so many other observations that
uh were made including Russell's paradox
and the halting problem and the
recursion uh theorem and so many other
principles are using diagonalization
uh at their core. So
Can we uh Can we just step back a little
bit? This infinity crisis led to a kind
of uh rebuilding of mathematics. So
uh it'd be nice if you lay out the
things that resulted in. So one is set
theory became the foundation of
mathematics. All mathematics could not
be built from sets, giving math its
first truly rigorous foundation.
The axiomatization
of mathematics. The paradoxes forced
mathematicians to develop ZFC and other
axiomatic systems.
And uh mathematical logic emerged. Uh
Gödel, Turing and others created entire
new fields. So can you uh explain what
set theory is
and uh how does it serve as a foundation
of uh modern mathematics and maybe even
the foundation of truth? That's a great
question.
Set theory really has two roles that
it's serving.
This kind of two ways that set theory
emerges.
On the one hand set theory
is the is its own subject of mathematics
which it with its own problems and
questions and answers and proof methods.
And so
really from this point of view set
theory is about the
transfinite recursive constructions or
well-founded definitions and
constructions.
And those ideas have been enormously
fruitful and set theorists have looked
into them and developed uh so many ideas
coming out of that. But set theory has
also happened to serve in this other
foundational role. It's very common to
hear things said about set theory that
really aren't taking account of this
distinction between the two roles that
it's serving. It's its own subject, but
it's also serving as a foundation of
mathematics.
So in its foundational role set theory
provides a way to think of a collection
of things as one thing. That's the the
central idea of set theory. A set is a
collection of things,
but you think of the set itself as one
abstract thing. So when you form the set
of real numbers, then that is a set.
It's one thing. It's a set and it has
elements inside of it. So it's sort of
like a bag of objects. A set is kind of
like a bag of objects. And so we have a
lot of different axioms that
describe the nature of this idea of
thinking of a collection of things as as
one thing itself, one abstract thing.
And axioms are
I guess
facts that we
assume are true based on which we then
build the ideas of mathematics. So
there's a bunch of facts, axioms about
sets
that we can put together and if they're
sufficiently
powerful, we can then build on top of
that a lot of really interesting
mathematics. Yeah, I think that's right.
So I mean the history of how of the
current set theory axioms known as the
Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms uh came out in
the early 20th century with with
Zermelo's idea. I mean the history is
quite fascinating because
um
Zermelo in 1904 offered a proof
that the what's called the axiom of
choice implies the well-ordering
principle.
So he described his proof and that was
extremely controversial at the time.
And there was no theory. There weren't
any axioms there. Cantor was not working
in an axiomatic framework. He didn't
have a list of axioms in the way that we
have for set theory now.
And Zermelo didn't either. Um and his
ideas were challenged so much with
regard to the well-ordering theorem
uh
that he was pressed to produce the
theory that in which his argument could
be formalized and that was the origin of
what's known as Zermelo set theory. Uh
and going to perplexity, the axiom of
choice is a fundamental principle in set
theory which states that for any
collection of non-empty sets, it is
possible to select exactly one element
from each set even if no explicit rule
to make the choice is given. This axiom
allows the construction of a new set
containing one element from each
original set even in cases where the
collection is infinite or where there is
no natural way to specify a selection
rule.
So this was controversial and uh this
was described before there was even a
language for axiomatic systems. That's
right. So on the one hand, I mean the
axiom of choice principle is
completely obvious that we want this to
be true, that it is true. I mean a lot
of people take it as a law of logic. If
you have a bunch of sets, then
there's a way of picking an element from
each of them. There's a function. If I
have a bunch of sets, then there's a
function that when you apply it to any
one of those sets gives you an element
of that set. It's it's a completely
natural principle.
I mean it's called the axiom of choice
which is a way of sort of
anthropomorphizing the mathematical
idea. It's not like the function is
choosing something. I mean it's just
that if you were to make such choices,
there would be a function that consisted
of the choices that you made. And the
difficulty is that when you when you
can't specify a rule or a procedure by
which you're making choices,
then it's difficult to say what the
function is that you're asserting
exists. You know, you you want to have
the view that well, there is a way of
choosing. I don't have a easy way to say
what the function is, but there
definitely is one. Yeah, this is the way
of thinking about the axiom of choice.
So we're going to say the the the three
letters of ZFC maybe a lot in this
conversation. You already mentioned
Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory. That's the Z and the F and
the C in that is this comes from this
axiom of choice. That's right. So ZFC
sounds like a super technical thing, but
it is the set of axioms that's the
foundation of modern mathematics. Yeah,
absolutely. So, one should be aware also
that there's huge parts of mathematics
that don't that pay attention to whether
the axiom of choice is being used and
they don't want to use the axiom of
choice so they work out the consequences
that's that are possible without the
axiom of choice or with weakened forms
of of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory and so
on. And that's quite a there's quite a
fair amount of work in that area.
I mean, but going back to the axiom of
choice for a bit, it's maybe
uh
interesting to
to give Russell's description of how to
think about the axiom of choice. So,
Russell describes
um
this uh
rich person has a
an infinite closet and in that closet he
has infinitely many pairs of shoes.
And he tells his butler
uh to uh please go and give me one shoe
from each pair.
And and the butler can do this easily
because he can for any pair of shoes he
can just always pick the left shoe.
I mean, there's a way of picking that we
can describe.
We always take the left one or always
take the right one or take the left one
if it's a red shoe and the right one if
it's a brown shoe or, you know, we can
invent rules that would result in these
kind of choice functions. So, we can
describe explicit choice functions. And
for those cases you don't need the axiom
of choice to know that there's a choice
function. When you can describe a
specific way of choosing, then you don't
need to appeal to the axiom to know that
there's a choice function.
But the problematic case occurs
when you think about the infinite
collection of socks that the person has
in their closet.
And if we assume that socks are sort of
indistinguishable within each pair, you
know, they match each other but they're
sort of, you know, indiscernible.
Then
the
the butler wouldn't have any kind of
rule for which sock in each pair to pick
and so it's not so clear that he has a
way
of
of producing one sock from each pair
because
Right. So, that's what's at stake is the
question of whether you can specify a
rule by which the
choice function, you know, a rule that
it obeys.
Uh
that defines the choice function or
whether there's sort of this arbitrary
choosing aspect to it. That's when you
need the axiom of choice to know that
there is such a function.
But of course, as a matter of
mathematical ontology we might find
attractive the idea that well, look. I
mean, I don't I don't not every way of
choosing the socks has to be defined by
a rule. Why should everything that
exists in mathematical reality follow a
rule or a procedure of that sort? If I
have the idea that my mathematical
ontology is rich with objects, then I
think that that there are all kinds of
functions and ways of choosing. Those
are all part of the mathematical reality
that I want to be talking about.
And so I don't have any problem
asserting the axiom of choice. Yes,
there is a way of choosing. Um but I
can't tell necessarily tell you what it
is. But in a mathematical argument I can
assume that I fix a choice function
because I know that there is one. So,
it's a the philosophical difference
between working when you have the axiom
of choice and when you don't is the
question of this constructive nature of
the argument. So, if you make an
argument and you appeal to the axiom of
choice, then maybe you're admitting that
the objects that you're producing in the
proof are not going to be constructive.
You're not going to be able to
necessarily say specific things about
them. But if you're just claiming to
make an existence claim, that's totally
fine. Whereas if you have a constructive
attitude about the nature of mathematics
and you think that mathematical claims
maybe are only warranted when you can
provide an explicit procedure for
producing the mathematical objects that
you're dealing with, uh then you're
probably going to want to deny the axiom
of choice and maybe much more.
Can we maybe speak to the axioms that uh
underlie ZFC? So, going to perplexities
ZFC or Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with
the axiom of choice, as we mentioned, is
the standard foundation for most modern
mathematics. It consists of the
following main axioms: axiom of
extensionality, axiom of empty set,
axiom of pairing, axiom of union, axiom
of power set, axiom of infinity, axiom
of separation, axiom of replacement,
axiom of regularity,
and axiom of choice.
Uh some of these are quite basic. Um but
it would be nice
to kind of give people a sense Sure. of
what it means to be an axiom. Like what
kind of basic
facts we can lay on the table on which
we can build some beautiful mathematics.
Yes, so the history of it is really
quite fascinating. So,
Zermelo introduced most of these axioms
I mean, as part of what's now called
Zermelo set theory
to formalize his proof from the axiom of
choice to the well-ordering principle,
which was an extremely controversial
result. So, in 1904 he gave the proof
without the theory and then he was
challenged to provide the theory and so
in 1908 he produced the Zermelo set
theory and gave the proof that in that
theory you can prove that every set
admits a well-ordering.
Um and so the axioms on the list, these
things like extensionality, express the
the most fundamental principles of the
understanding of sets that he wanted to
be talking about. So, for example,
extensionality says
if two sets have the same members, then
they're equal. So, it's this idea that
the sets consists of the collection of
their members and that's it. There's
nothing else that's going on in the set.
So, it's just if if two sets have the
same members, then they are the same
set. So, it's maybe the most primitive
uh axiom
um in some respect. Well, there's also,
just to give a flavor,
uh there exists a set with no elements
called the empty set. Uh for any two
sets there's a set that contains exactly
those two sets as elements. For any set
there's a set that contains exactly the
elements of the elements of that set, so
the union set.
And then there's the power set. For any
set there's a set whose elements are
exactly the subsets of the original set,
the power set. And the axiom of
infinity, there exists an infinite set,
typically a set that contains the empty
set and is closed under the operation of
adding one more element.
Back to our hotel
example. That's right. And there's
there's more, but this
is kind of fascinating um
I just want to put yourself in the
mindset of people at the beginning of
this of trying to formalize set theory.
It's it's fascinating that humans can do
that. I read some historical accounts by
historians about that time period,
specifically about Zermelo's axioms and
his proof of the well-ordering theorem.
And the historians were saying um never
before in the history of mathematics has
a mathematical theorem been argued about
so publicly and so vociferously
uh as that theorem of Zermelo's.
Um
and it's fascinating also because
the axiom of choice was widely regarded
as a kind of you know, basic principle
at first, but then when but people were
very suspicious of the well-ordering
theorem because no one could imagine a
well-ordering, say, of the real numbers.
And so that this was a case when Zermelo
seemed to be from principles that seemed
quite reasonable proving this obvious
untruth.
And so people were mathematicians were
objecting. Um but then Zermelo and
others actually looked into the
mathematical papers and so on of some of
the people who had been objecting so
vociferously
and found in many cases that they were
implicitly using the axiom of choice in
their own arguments, even though they
would argue publicly against it.
Because it's so natural to use it
because it's such an obvious principle
in a way. I mean, it's easy to just use
it by accident with if you're not
critical enough and you don't even
realize that you're using the axiom of
choice. So, that that's true now even.
People like to pay attention to when the
axiom of choice is used or not used in
mathematical arguments. I mean, up until
this day.
It used to be more important in the
early 20th century it was very important
because people didn't know if it was a
consistent theory or not and there were
these antinomies arising and so there
was a worry about consistency of the
axioms. Um but then of course,
eventually with the result of of Gödel
and Cohen and so on, they this
consistency question specifically about
the axiom of choice sort of falls away.
We know that it the axiom of choice
itself will never be the source of
inconsistency in the set theory. If
there's inconsistency with the axiom of
choice, then it's it's already
inconsistent without the axiom of
choice. So, it's not the cause of
inconsistency.
And so in that from that point of view,
the need to pay attention to whether
you're using it or not from a
consistency point of view is somehow
less important. But still there's this
uh
reason to pay attention to it on the
grounds of these constructivist ideas
that I had mentioned earlier. And we
should say in set theory consistency
means that it is impossible to derive a
contradiction from the axioms of the
theory. So, means
that there's no contradictions. That's
that's a consistent axiomatic systems
that there's no contradictions. A
consistent theory is one for which you
cannot prove a contradiction from that
theory.
Maybe a quick pause, quick break, quick
bathroom break?
You mentioned to me offline uh we were
talking about Russell's paradox and that
there's uh a nice another kind of
anthropomorphizable
proof of uncountability.
Uh I was wondering if you can lay that
out. Oh, yeah, sure. Absolutely. Both
Russell's paradox and the proof?
>> Right.
So, let's So, we we talked about
Cantor's proof that the real numbers,
the set of real numbers, is an
uncountable infinity. It's a strictly
larger infinity than the natural
numbers. But, Cantor actually proved
a much more general fact, namely that
for any set whatsoever,
the power set of that set is a strictly
larger set. So, the power set is the set
containing all the subsets of the
original set. So, if you have a set
and you look at the collection of all of
its subsets, then Cantor proved that
this is this is a bigger set. They're
not equinumerous. Of course, there's
always at least as many subsets as
elements because for any element you can
make the the singleton subset that has
only that guy as a member, right? So,
there's always at least as many subsets
as elements.
But, the question is whether they
whether it's strictly more or not. And
so, Cantor reasoned like this. It's very
simple. It's a kind of distilling the
abstract diagonalization idea without
encumbered by the complexity of the real
numbers. So, we have a set X
and we're looking at all of its subsets.
That's the power set of X. Suppose that
X and the power set of X have the same
size. Suppose to a contradiction they
have the same size.
So, that means we can associate to every
individual of X
a subset.
And so, now let me define a new set. I
mean, another set. I'm going to define
it. Let's call it D.
And D is the subset of X that contains
all the individuals that are not in
their set.
Every individual
was associated with a subset of X. And
I'm looking at the individuals that are
not in that their set.
Maybe nobody's like that. Maybe there's
no element of X that's like that. Or
maybe they're all like that. Or maybe
some of them are and some of them
aren't. I don't It doesn't really matter
for the argument. I defined a subset D
consisting of the individuals that are
not in the set that's attached to them.
But, that's a perfectly good subset. And
so, because of the equinumerosity, it
would have to be attached to it to a
particular individual.
You know, and
but that Let's call that person
uh it should be a name starting with D.
So, Diana.
And now we ask, is Diana an element of D
or not? But, if Diana is an element of
D, then she is in her set.
So, she shouldn't be because the set D
was the the set of individuals that are
not in their set.
So, if Diana is in D, then she shouldn't
be. But, if she isn't in D, then she
wouldn't be in her set. And so, she
should be in D. That That's a
contradiction.
So, therefore,
the number of subsets is always greater
than the number of elements for any set.
And the anthropomorphizing idea is the
following.
I like to talk about it this way. Uh
For any collection of people, you can
you can form more committees from them
than there are people.
Even if you have infinitely many people.
Suppose you have an infinite set of
people.
And what's a committee? Well, a
committee is just a list of who's on the
committee, basically, the members of the
committee. So, there's there's all the
two-person committees, and there's all
the one-person committees, and there's
the universal the worst committee, the
one that everyone is on. And then the
best committee is the empty committee
with no members and never meets and so
on, you know. Or is the empty committee
meeting all the time? I'm not sure.
Yeah, that's Wow, that's a profound
question. And does a a committee with
just one member meet also?
>> Yeah, maybe it's always in session. I
don't know.
>> Yeah. So, So, the the
the claim is that there's more
committees than people. Mhm. Okay,
suppose not. Well, then we could make an
association between the people and the
committees. So, we would have a kind of
every committee could be named after a
person in a one-to-one way.
And I'm not saying that the person is on
the committee that's named after them or
not on it, whatever. Maybe sometimes it
happens, sometimes it doesn't. I don't
know. It doesn't matter.
But, let's form what I call committee D,
which consists of all the people that
are not on the committee that's named
after them. Mhm.
Okay, maybe that's everyone. Maybe it's
no one. Maybe it's half the people. It
doesn't matter.
That's a committee. It's a set of
people.
And so, it has to be named after
someone.
Let's call that person Daniella.
So, now we ask, is Daniella on the
committee that's named after her? Well,
if she is,
then she shouldn't be because it was the
committee of people who aren't on their
on their own committee. Uh and if she
isn't, then she should be. So, again,
it's a contradiction.
So, when I was teaching at Oxford,
one of my students uh
came up with the following different
anthropomorphization of Cantor's
argument.
Let's consider all possible fruit
salads. We have a given collection of
fruits, you know, apples and oranges and
grapes, whatever. And a fruit salad
consists of some collection of those
fruits. So, there's the
banana-pear-grape salad and so on.
There's a lot of different kinds of
salad. Every set of fruits makes a
salad, a fruit salad. Okay. And we want
to prove that for any collection of
fruits, even if there are infinitely
many different kinds of fruit,
for any collection of fruits, there are
more possible fruit salads than there
are fruits.
So, if not, then you can put a
one-to-one correspondence between the
fruits and the fruit salads. So, you
could name every fruit salad after a
fruit. Might not be That fruit might not
be in that salad. Doesn't matter. We're
just It's a naming, a one-to-one
correspondence.
And then, of course, we form
the diagonal salad, which consists of
all the fruits that are not in the salad
that's named after them. Mhm.
And that That's a perfectly good salad.
It might be the kind of diet salad if it
was the empty salad, or it might be the
universal salad, which had all fruits in
it if all the fruits are in it. Or it
might have just some and not all.
So, that diagonal salad would have to be
named after some fruit. So, let's
suppose it's named after durian, meaning
that it was associated with durian in
the one-to-one correspondence. And then
we ask, well, is durian
in the salad that it's named after? And
if it is, then it shouldn't be. And if
it isn't, then it should be. And so,
it's again the same contradiction. So,
So, all of those arguments are just the
same as Cantor's proof that the power
set of any set is bigger than the set.
And this is exactly the same logic that
comes up in Russell's paradox because
Russell is arguing that
um the class of all sets can't be a set
uh because if it were, then we could
form the the set of all sets that are
not elements of themselves.
So, basically, he's What Russell is
proving is that there are more
collections of sets than than elements.
Because we can form the diagonal class,
you know, the class of all sets that are
not elements of themselves. If that were
a set,
then it would be an element of itself if
and only if it was not an element of
itself. It's exactly the same logic in
all four of those arguments. Yeah. So,
there can't be a class of all sets
because if there were, then they would
have to be a class of all sets that
aren't elements of themselves.
But, but that set would be an element of
itself if and only if it's not an
element of itself, which is a
contradiction.
So, this is the essence of the Russell
paradox. Um I don't call it the Russell
paradox, actually. When I teach it, I
call it Russell's theorem. There's no
universal set. Uh and uh it's not really
confusing anymore. At the time, it was
very confusing. But, um
uh now we've absorbed this nature of set
theory into our fundamental
understanding of of how sets are, and
it's not confusing anymore.
I mean, the history is fascinating
though of the Russell paradox because
um before that time, Frege was working
on his monumental work undertaking
implementing the philosophy of logicism,
which is the attempt to reduce all of
mathematics to logic. So, Frege wanted
to give an account of all of mathematics
in terms of logical notions.
And he was writing this monumental work
and had formulated his basic principles.
And those principles happened to imply
that
for any property whatsoever, you could
form the set of objects with that
property.
This is known as the general
comprehension principle.
And
and he was appealing to the principles
that support that axiom throughout his
work. I mean, it was really it wasn't
just an incidental thing. He was really
using this principle.
And Russell wrote him a letter when he
observed the work in progress
that there was this problem because if
you accept the principle that for any
property whatsoever you can make the set
of objects with that property, then you
could form the set of all sets that are
not members of themselves. That's just
an instance of the general comprehension
principle.
And
but
the set of all sets that aren't elements
of themselves can't be a set because if
it were, then it would be an element of
itself if and only if it's not a member
of itself, and that's a contradiction.
And so Russell wrote this letter to
Frege yet and it was just at the moment
when Frege was finishing his work. It
was already at the publishers and
you know, in press basically.
But it's completely devastating. I mean,
it must have been such a a horrible
situation for Frege to be placed in
because
he's finished this monumental work,
you know,
years of his life dedicated to this and
Russell finds this
basically
one-line proof of a contradiction in the
fundamental principles of the of the
thesis
that completely destroys the whole
system and
Frege had put in the appendix of his
work a response to Russell's letter in
which he explained what happened and he
wrote very gracefully
"Hardly anything more unwelcome can
befall a scientific writer than to have
one of the foundations of his edifice
shaken after the work is finished."
"This is the position into which I was
put by a letter from Mr. Bertrand
Russell as the printing of this volume
was nearing completion."
And then he goes on to explain the
matter concerns his basic law five and
so on and it's heartbreak. I mean,
there's nothing more traumatic to
a person who dreams of construct in
mathematics all from logic
to get a very clean simple
contradiction.
I mean, that's just uh You devote your
life to this work and then it's shown to
be contradictory and that must have been
heartbreaking.
What do you think about the the Frege
project, the philosophy of logic, the
dream of the power of logic to construct
a mathematical universe? Of course, the
the project of logicism did not die with
Frege and it was uh continued and you
know, there's a whole movement, the
neo-logicists and so on in contemporary
times even. But my view of the matter is
that
really we should view the main goals of
logicism are basically completely
fulfilled
in the rise of set-theoretic
foundationalism. I mean, uh when you
view ZFC as the foundation of
mathematics and in my view, the
principles of ZFC are fundamentally
logical in character including the axiom
of choice
as a principle of logic.
This is a highly disputed point of view
though cuz a lot of people take even the
axiom of infinity as not as mathematical
inherently mathematical and not
logical and so on. But I think if you
adopt the view
that the principles of ZFC have to do
with the principles of abstract, you
know, set formation which is
fundamentally logical in character,
then it's complete success for logicism.
So the fact that set theory is able to
serve as a foundation means that
mathematics can be founded on logic.
I think this is a good moment to talk
about
Gödel's incompleteness theorems. So can
you explain them and what do they teach
us about
the nature of mathematical truth?
Absolutely. It's one of the most
profound developments in mathematical
logic. I mean, the incompleteness
theorems is when
mathematical logic in my view first
became sophisticated.
It's a kind of birth of the
subject of mathematical logic.
But to understand the theorems, you
really have to start a little bit
earlier with Hilbert's program
because at the time, you know, with the
Russell paradox and so on, there were
these various contradictions popping up
in various parts of set theory and the
Burali-Forti paradox and so on and
and Hilbert was famously supportive of
set theory. I mean, there's this quote
of him
um saying "No one shall cast us from the
paradise that Cantor has created for
us."
And what I take him to mean by that is
he was so captured by the idea of using
set theory as a foundation of
mathematics and it was so powerful and
convenient and unifying in a way that
was extremely important and he wasn't he
didn't want to give that up.
Despite the danger of these
paradoxes, these contradictions
basically is how some people viewed them
and so This minefield of paradoxes
Right. A minefield, that's a really good
way of describing the situation. And so
Hilbert said, "Well, look, we have to
fix this problem, you know, we want to
use the set theory foundations, but we
want to do it in a way that is
trustworthy and reliable. We can't allow
that the foundations of mathematics are
in question, you know." This is a kind
of attitude I think that underlies
Hilbert
and the Hilbert program. And so he
proposed, "Look,
we're going to have this strong theory,
this set theory that we want to be
proving our theorems in,
um but
uh I mean, on the one hand, we we want
it to be as strong as possible. We would
like it to answer all the questions."
That there's another famous quote of
Hilbert in his retirement address where
um he proclaims
"Wir müssen wissen, wir werden wissen."
So we we must know, we we will know, in
which he's very optimistic about the
ability of mathematics to answer all of
the questions of mathematics that
we have posed. We have all these
problems we want to solve and he is
saying "We're going to do it. We're
going to solve all these problems." So
we want to propose this strong theory
and one has the sense that he had in
mind set theory
um
in which all the questions are going to
be answered. Okay. But secondly, we want
to combine that with
in a very weak arithmetic purely
finitistic theory. We want to prove
that the reasoning process of the strong
theory is safe. Okay? So in order to
make sense of that point of view, you
you basically have to invent the
philosophy of formalism
uh where we can look at what is the
proof, what is it the nature of
mathematical reasoning.
And on Hilbert's way of thinking about
this, a proof is
basically a itself a finitistic kind of
object. It's a sequence of
if you think about the nature of what a
proof is, it's it's a sequence of
assertions which can be viewed as sort
of sequences of symbols that conform
with certain rules of logical reasoning.
And and this is a a formalist way of
understanding the nature of proof. So we
think about a proof in a kind of
syntactic formal way even though the
contents of those statements might be
referring to infinite uncountable
objects,
the statements themselves are not
infinite uncountable objects. The
statements themselves are just finite
sequences of symbols. So we kind of
think of proof as a
maybe it's fair to say almost like a
outside of math. It's like tools
operating on math and then for Hilbert,
he thought proof is inside the axiomatic
system, something like this. Yeah,
that's helpful. That's wild.
The main thing about formalism is that
you you think of the process of doing
mathematics, you divorce it from the
meaning of the mathematical assertions,
right?
So the meaning of the mathematical
assertions that you make in this
infinitary theory has to do with these
huge uncountable infinities and so on
possibly and and and and that's uh
a very sort of uncertain realm maybe and
the source of the paradoxes and so on in
some people's minds. And so um but the
reasoning process itself is consists of
writing down sequences of symbols on
your on your page and you know,
undertaking a
an argument with them which is following
these finitistic rules. And so
so
so if we divorce the meaning of the
symbols from just the process of
manipulating the symbols, it's a way of
looking at the nature of mathematics as
a kind of formal game in which the
meaning may be totally absent.
I don't think it's necessarily part of
the formalist view that there is no
meaning behind, but rather it's
emphasizing
that we can divorce the meaning of the
sentences from the process of
manipulating those sentences.
And then Hilbert wanted to prove in this
purely finitistic theory that if we
follow the rules of that game, we're
never going to get a contradiction.
Mhm. So those were the two aims of the
Hilbert program
is to
found the strong infinitary theory,
probably set theory, which is going to
answer all the questions. And then
secondly, prove in the finitistic theory
that the strong theory is safe. In other
words, consistent. Yeah. What does the
word finitistic infinitary theory mean?
>> Yeah, well, this is of course
philosophically contentious and people
have different ideas about what exactly
it should mean. And so there's hundreds
of papers on exactly that
uh question. But I I like to take it
just kind of informally. I mean, it
means that we're talking about finite
sequences of symbols and we're going to
have a a
a theory, you know, finite strings of
symbols and we
a finitistic theory would be one whose
subject matter is about those kinds of
things so that we can
conceivably argue about the nature of
these finite strings. So a a proof is
just a finite sequence of statements so
that every statement is either one of
the axioms
or follows by the laws of logic from the
earlier statements in some specified
manner like using modus ponens or some
other law of logic like that.
Um and such that the last line on the
list is, you know, the theorem that
you're proving. So that's what a proof
is in this kind of way of thinking. To
take a specific example, I mean, I
always conceive of the
perhaps the most natural finitistic
theory that one would be called upon to
exhibit would be piano arithmetic, the
theory of piano arithmetic, which
which is a first-order theory of the
nature of arithmetic. Um, but okay, so
some people say, "Well, piano arithmetic
has these strong first-order induction
axioms and this much, much weaker
versions of arithmetic like I sigma
naught or I sigma one and so on, which
are
even more finitistic than piano
arithmetic." So, different philosophical
positions take different attitudes about
what is what does it take to be
finitistic? How finitistic do you have
to be
to be truly finitistic? So, going to
Perplexity, piano arithmetic is a
foundational system for formalizing the
properties and operations of natural
numbers using a set of axioms called the
piano axioms. Piano arithmetic provides
a formal language and axioms for
arithmetic operations such as addition
and multiplication over the natural
numbers. The axioms define the existence
of a first natural number, usually zero
or one, the concept of successor
function, which generates the next
natural number, rules for addition and
multiplication built from these
concepts, the principle of induction
allowing proofs around all natural
numbers.
And it goes on. So, it's a a very
particular kind of arithmetic that is a
finitistic. I I might I view it as
finitistic, but this is a contentious
view. I mean, not everyone agrees with
that. That's what I got it. Should say
that
Um, piano arithmetic is
one of the hugely
hugely successful theories of the
natural numbers and and elementary
number theory. Essentially,
all of classical number theory, so what
whatever kind of theorems you want to be
proving about the prime numbers or
factorization or
uh, any kind of finitistic reasoning
about finite combinatorial objects, all
of it can be formalized in piano
arithmetic. I mean, that's the
the the basic situation. Of course, one
has to qualify those statements in light
of the Gödel incompleteness theorem, but
uh, for the most part, the classical
um, number theoretic analysis of the of
the finite numbers is uh, almost
entirely developable inside piano
arithmetic.
So, if we if we go back to the Hilbert
program, so Hilbert has these two goals.
Produce the strong theory, which is
going to answer all the questions, and
then prove by purely finitistic means
that that theory will never lead into
contradiction.
And one can think about, well, the
incompleteness theorem should be viewed
as a decisive refutation of the Hilbert
program. It It defeats both of those
goals decisively, completely.
But but before explaining that, maybe
one should think about
you know, what if Hilbert had been
right? What would be the nature of
mathematics in the world that Hilbert is
telling us to search for?
>> If I may go into Perplexity's definition
of Hilbert's program, it was David
Hilbert's early 20th century project to
give all of classical mathematics a
completely secure finitistic foundation.
In essence, the goal was to formalize
all of mathematics in precise axiomatic
systems and then prove using only very
elementary finitistic reasoning about
symbols that these systems are free of
contradiction.
>> Right, exactly right. Let's imagine what
it would be like if he were if he were
had been right.
So, we would have this finitistic theory
and it would prove that the strong
theory was free of contradiction.
So, we could start
enumerating proofs from the strong
theory. We can I mean, right now, we can
write a computer program that would
systematically generate all possible
proofs
from a given theory.
And
so, we could have like this theorem
enumeration machine that just spit out
theorems all day long in such a manner
that every single theorem would
eventually be produced by this device.
And so, if you had a mathematical
question
of any kind,
you could answer it by just waiting for
either the answer to come out yes
from the machine or the answer to come
out no.
So, the the nature of mathematical
investigation in Hilbert's world is one
of just turning the crank of the theorem
enumeration machine,
devoid of creative thinking or
imagination. It's just getting the
answer from the from this by rote
procedure.
So, so Hilbert, in effect, is telling us
I mean, in with his program that the the
fundamental nature of mathematics is
rote computation.
I mean, the way I think about the
Hilbert program seems extremely
attractive in the historical context of
being worried about the antinomies, the
the inconsistencies.
And so, how can we kind of block them?
And so, it seems natural
first of all, to have a strong theory
that's going to answer all the questions
because the idea of logical independence
and pervasiveness that we now know
exists um, just wasn't uh,
you know, there was no known They didn't
know anything like that happening ever.
And so, um, it's natural to think that
it wouldn't happen. And also, that they
would be able to guard against this
inconsistency. So, it seems like the
goals of the Hilbert program
are quite natural in that historical
context. But, you know, when you think a
little more about what the nature of it
would be like, it shows you this kind of
rote procedure. And now you're saying,
"Well, that doesn't seem so unlikely."
Maybe, I mean, in the light of the
increasing computer power and so on,
it's actually maybe turning into our
everyday experience where the machines
are calculating more and more for us and
um, it's in a way that
uh, could be alarming. Okay. But, okay,
so to talk about the alternative to the
Hilbert point of view, I mean, if he's
wrong, then what is the nature of
mathematical reality? Well, it would
mean that
we couldn't ever maybe, for the first
goal, we couldn't ever write down a
theory that answered all the questions.
So, we would always be in a situation
where our best theory, even the
infinitistic theories,
uh,
would have questions that they stumble
with and are unable to answer.
Independence uh, would occur.
But then also, because of the failure of
the second goal,
we would also have to be constantly
worrying about whether our theories were
consistent or not, and we wouldn't have
any truly convincing means of saying
that they were free from contradiction.
And the
fact of Gödel in of Gödel's
incompleteness theorem shows that that
is exactly the nature of mathematical
reality, actually. Those are the two
incompleteness theorems. So, the first
incompleteness theorem says, "You cannot
write down a computably axiomatizable
theory that answers all the questions.
Every such theory will be incomplete
assuming it includes a certain amount of
arithmetic. And secondly, no such theory
can ever prove its own consistency." So,
not only is it the case that the
finitistic theory can't prove the
consistency of the strong infinitistic
theory, but even the infinitistic theory
can't prove its own consistency. Right,
that's the second incompleteness
theorem.
And so, it's in that sense a decisive
takedown of the Hilbert program,
um, which is really quite remarkable the
extent to which his theorem just really
answered that whole
puzzle.
Um, it's quite amazing. But there's
another aspect
kind of easy to think about. I mean,
if you if you're wondering about
theories that prove their own
consistency, then
I mean, would you trust a theory that
proves of itself that it's consistent? I
mean, that's like
it's like the used car salesman telling
you, "Oh, I'm trustworthy." I mean, it's
not a reason to trust the used car
salesman, is it? Just because he says
that. So, similarly, if you have a
theory that proves its own consistency,
well, I mean, even an inconsistent
theory would prove its own consistency.
And so, it doesn't seem to be a logical
reason to believe in the consistency if
you have a theory that proves itself
consistent. Uh, just for clarification,
you use the word theory. Is it in this
context synonymous with axiomatic
system?
Right. So, in mathematical logic, theory
is a technical
and it means any set of sentences in a
formal language. And so, if you say
axiomatic system, it's basically
synonymous to my usage with theory. So,
a theory means
you know, the consequences of a set of
axioms. Or, people are sometimes unclear
on whether they just mean the axioms or
the consequences of the axioms. So,
theory includes both the axioms and the
consequences of the axioms, and you use
it interchangeably, and the context is
supposed to help you figure out which of
the two you're talking about, the axioms
or the consequences. Or maybe to you,
they're basically the same. Yeah, well,
they're so closely connected. Although,
you know, all the features aren't the
same. So,
uh,
if you have a computable list of axioms
for a theory,
then you can start enumerating the the
consequences of the axioms.
But, you won't be able to computably
decide whether a given statement is a
consequence or not. You can enumerate
the consequences, so you can
you can semi-decide the consequences,
but you won't be able to decide yes or
no whether a given statement is a
consequence or not.
So, it's the distinction between a
problem being computably decidable and a
problem being computably enumerable
which um was made clear following the
work of Turing and others that came from
from that. I mean it So, that's one
difference between the list of axioms of
the theory and the theory itself.
The axioms could be You can decide maybe
computably whether something is an axiom
or not, but that doesn't mean that you
can decide computably whether or not
something is a theorem or not. Usually,
you only get to decide the positive
instances. If something is a theorem,
you will eventually come to recognize
that, but if something isn't a theorem,
maybe at no point will you be able to
say, "No, that's not a theorem." And
that's of course connected to the
halting problem and all of these All of
these contradictions and paradoxes are
all nicely beautifully interconnected.
>> That's right. Yeah, absolutely. So, can
we just linger on Gödel's incompleteness
theorem? You mentioned the two
components there.
You know, there's so many questions to
ask. Like, what what is the difference
between provability and uh truth? What
is true and what is provable? Maybe
that's a good line to draw there.
>> really core distinction that
it's fascinating to me to go back and
read
even the early 20th century people
before Gödel and Tarski
and they were totally sloppy about this
distinction between truth and proof. It
wasn't clear at all until Gödel
basically
although even as late as Bourbaki has a
kind of confusion in this foundational
work. So, this
standard graduate level textbooks used
in France in the presentation of logic,
they are conflating truth and proof. To
be true for them means to be provable.
So, in the early days, maybe it wasn't
clear enough that the concept of truth
needed a mathematical investigation or
analysis. Maybe it was already taken to
be fully clear.
But
because of the incompleteness theorem,
we realized that actually there's quite
subtle things happening, right? And so,
why don't we talk about this distinction
a bit? To me, it's absolutely core and
fundamental to our understanding of
mathematical logic now.
This distinction between truth and
proof.
So,
truth is
on the semantic side of the syntax
semantics dichotomy. Truth has to do
with the nature of of reality. I mean,
okay, when I talk about reality, I'm not
talking about physical reality. I'm
talking about mathematical reality. So,
so we have a concept of something being
true in a structure, a statement being
true in a mathematical structure. Like,
maybe you have the real field or
something and you want to know, does it
satisfy this statement or that
statement? Or you have a group of some
kind or maybe you have a graph. This is
a particular kind of mathematical
structure that has a bunch of vertices
and edges and you want to know um you
know, does does this graph satisfy that
statement? And Tarski gave this
absolutely wonderful account of the
nature of truth in what's now known as
the disquotational theory of truth.
And what Tarski says is, "The sentence
snow is white  is true
if and only if snow is white."
And
what he means by that is, "Look, to say
truth is a property of an assertion. So,
we can think of the assertion as a
syntactically.
So,
the the the sentence is true
if and only if the content of the
sentence is the case, you know? So, the
sentence 'snow is white', you know, in
quotations,
uh
is true, that just means
that snow is white.
And that that's why it's called the
disquotational theory because we we
remove the quotation marks from the
assertion, right? And and you can use
this idea of disquotation to give a
formal definition of truth in a
mathematical structure of a statement in
a formal language. So, for example, if I
have a formal language that allows me to
make atomic statements about the objects
and relations of the structure and I can
build up a formal language with, you
know, with
with the logical connectives of and and
or and implies and not and so on. And
maybe I have quantifiers, right? Then
for example, to say that the structure
satisfies fee and psi,
that that single statement, fee and psi,
I'm thinking of that as one statement,
just means
that it satisfies fee
and it satisfies psi. And if you notice
what happened in there, I
at first the and was part of the
sentence, inside the sentence. But then
in the second part, I was using the word
and to refer to the conjunction of the
two conditions. So,
>> Yeah, it has the disquotation. Yeah, it
has the disquotation. And so, this idea
can be done for all the logical
connectives and quantifiers and
everything. You You're applying Tarski's
idea of disquotation.
And it allows you to define by induction
the the truth of any assertion in a
formal language inside any mathematical
structure. And so, to say that a
sentence is true, first of all, it's
ambiguous unless you tell me which
structure you're talking about it being
true in.
Um and so, maybe we have in mind the
standard model of arithmetic or
something with the natural numbers in
the arithmetic structure and I want to
know, is a given statement true in that
structure?
Then then we have a a formal definition
of what that means according to the
Tarski recursive definition of truth.
Okay, that's truth. Proof, on the other
hand, is
you know, in this Hilbert way of
thinking, we can develop proof theory.
What is a proof for a mathematician? For
a mathematical logician, a proof
is a certain sequence or or arrangement
of sentences in the formal language that
accord with the logical rules of a proof
system. So, there's certain modes of
reasoning that are allowed.
So, if you know A and you know A implies
B in the proof, then at a later step
you're allowed to um
uh to write B as a consequence. So, if
you know A and you know A implies B,
those are both two statements that are
known, then you can deduce B as a
consequence according to the rule of
modus ponens. This is the rule modus
ponens.
And you know, there's a lot of other
rules. Some people would call this uh
implication elimination. There's
different kinds of proof systems.
There's a lot of different formal proof
systems that exist that are studied by
the proof theorists.
And all of them have the property that
they're sound, which means that if the
premises of the argument are all true in
a structure
and you have a proof to get a
conclusion, then the conclusion is also
true in that structure. So, that's what
it means to be sound, that
proof proofs preserve truth. They're
truth-preserving
arguments, okay?
But also
um
the proof systems are also generally
complete. They're both sound and
complete. And complete means
um that whenever a statement is a
consequence,
a logical consequence of some other
statements, which means that whenever
the assumptions are true, then the then
the consequence is also true in a in the
structure.
So, whenever you have a logical
consequence, then there is a proof of
it.
Okay?
And the proof systems generally have
both of those properties. They're sound
and complete. There's a third property a
lot of logicians talk about
sound and complete sound and complete
this, sound and complete that. But
actually, there's a hidden third
adjective that they should always be
talking about in any such case, which is
that um
you should be able to recognize whether
or not something is a proof or not. So,
there's a computable aspect uh
to to the proof systems. We want to be
able to recognize whether something is a
proof. It should be computably decidable
whether a given sequence of statements
is a proof or not.
So, we we don't want a proof system in
which someone claims to have a proof,
but we can't check that fact, that
whether it's a proof or not.
We want to be able to
you know, to correctly adjudicate all
claims to having a proof. Yeah, a
mathematician comes to mind that said he
has a proof, but the margins are too
small
Exactly.
So, that doesn't count as a proof. So,
generally, all the classical proof
systems that are used are sound and
complete and also computably decidable
in the sense that we can decide whether
something is a proof or not. So, what is
again the tension between truth and
proof? Which is more
powerful and how do the two interplay
with the contradictions that we've been
discussing? So, the incompleteness
theorem is the question whether we could
say write down a theory
for arithmetic, say for the standard
model of arithmetic where we have the
natural numbers and plus and times and
zero one and less than and so on. In
that formal language,
we can express an enormous number of
statements about the nature not only of
arithmetic, but actually by various
coding methods, we can express
essentially all of finite mathematics in
that structure.
So, the question would be, can we write
down a computable list of axioms that
will answer all those questions by
proof? In other words, we want to have a
complete theory.
A theory of arithmetic that proves all
and only the true statements. That would
be the goal. Hilbert would love that. I
mean, that would be supportive of
Hilbert's program to have such a
complete theory of arithmetic. And Gödel
proved that this is impossible. You
cannot write down a computable list of
axioms that is complete in that sense.
There will always be statements
if the theory is consistent, there will
always be statements that you cannot
prove and you cannot refute. So, they
are independent of that theory. How
traumatic is that that there are
statements that are independent from the
theory?
I mean, my view is that
yeah, this isn't traumatic at all. This
is rather
completely eye-opening in terms of our
understanding of the nature of
mathematical reality. I mean,
we're not
we we understand this profound fact
about our situation with regard to
mathematical truth.
The incompleteness theorem tells us,
"Look, we just can't write down a list
of axioms that is going to be consistent
and it's going to answer all the
questions. It's impossible."
And so, I don't think of it as trauma. I
just think, "Look, this is the nature of
of mathematical reality and it's good
that we know it. And so, now we need to
move on from that and you know, do what
we can in light of that." Is it fair to
say that that in general it means if I
give you a statement you can't know
if your
axiomatic system would be able to prove
it. That's right. In general, you cannot
the the provability problem, we can
formulate it as a decision problem.
Given a theory and given a statement, is
that statement a consequence of that
theory? Yeah.
This is one of the most famous decision
problems, in fact, the very first one
because it's the it's equivalent to the
Hilbert-Ackermann um
Entscheidungsproblem,
which is also appearing in the title of
Turing's 1936 paper that was so
important for computability theory. So,
it's it's a formulation of the
Entscheidungsproblem.
Does a given theory
have a given statement as a logical
consequence, which because of Gödel's
completeness theorem, not his
incompleteness theorem, but his earlier
completeness theorem,
Gödel had proved that the proof systems
that they studied did have this
completeness property that I mentioned.
So, provability is the same as logical
consequence. So, and this is an
undecidable decision problem. Turing
proved and and we now know it's
equivalent to the halting problem.
Can you describe the halting problem
because it's a it's a thing that shows
up in a very useful and again traumatic
way through a lot of computer science,
through a lot of mathematics? Yeah, the
halting problem is expressing uh a
fundamental property of
computational processes. So, given a
program or maybe we think of it as a
program together with its input, but let
me just call it a program. So, given a
program, we could run that program,
but I want to pose it as a decision
problem. Will this program ever complete
its task? Will it ever halt? And the
halting problem is the question, given a
program,
will it halt? Yes or no?
And
of course,
for any one instance, the answer is
either yes or no. The That's not what
we're talking about. We're asked We're
talking about whether there's a
computable procedure to answer all
instances of this question. So, it's a
decision problem is given as a scheme of
instances for all possible programs that
you could ask about. What I want to know
is, is there a computable procedure that
will answer those questions, right? And
and it turns out the answer is no. The
halting problem is computably
undecidable. There is no computable
procedure that will correctly answer all
instances of whether a given program
will halt.
And of course,
we can get half the answers in the sense
that
you give me a program and you say, "Will
this halt?" And I could take that
program and I could run it. Mhm. And I
could keep running it.
And maybe in a week it would halt. And
at that time I could say, "Yes,
it halted."
So, I can get the yes answers correctly
for halting, all the yes answers.
But the problem is
if it didn't halt yet, like maybe I
waited, you know, a thousand years and
it still hasn't halted,
I don't seem entitled to say no, it's
not going to halt yet cuz maybe in a
thousand and one years it'll halt.
And so, at no point can I seem to say
no. In order to say no, it won't ever
halt,
I it seems like I would have to really
understand how the program worked and
what it was doing.
So, giving the yes answers was sort of
trivial. You didn't have to understand
it, you just needed to run it, which is
a kind of rote task. But to give the no
answers, you need to have a kind of deep
insight into the nature of the program
and what it's doing
in such a way that you would understand
it and be able to see, "Oh, no, I can
see this program is never going to halt
because, you know,
it's a much more difficult task to say
no, it won't halt than it is to say yes,
it halted cuz I ran it and it halted. Um
and it turns out to be impossible to
have a computable procedure that gives
the no answers, yeah. And the argument
is not very difficult. Should we Yes,
let's let's do it. Okay.
Suppose toward contradiction, I mean,
all these proofs are by contradiction,
and this argument is going to be a
diagonal argument in the same style as
the Russell argument and the Cantor
argument and Gödel's argument that we
haven't talked about yet. So many
diagonal arguments come in.
So,
suppose toward contradiction that we had
a procedure for determining whether a
given program halted on a given input.
Now, let me describe
I'm going to use that procedure as a
subroutine in the following process.
And my process, let's call it Q, process
Q, and it takes as input
a program P.
Okay?
And the first thing it does is it asks
that subroutine, "Hey,
would P halt if I ran it on P itself?"
Okay? That's the diagonal part cuz we're
applying P to P, right?
Okay, so I'm describing program Q, and
program Q takes as input P, which is
itself a program. And the first thing it
does is it asks the halting subroutine
program, "Would P halt on P?"
And if the answer comes back from the
subroutine, "Yeah, that would halt,"
then what I do in program Q is I
immediately jump into an infinite loop.
So, I don't halt. If P halts on P, I
don't halt. Mhm. But if the answer came
back, "No, P is never going to halt on
P,"
then I halt immediately.
Okay, so the and that's it. I've
described what Q does.
>> Mhm.
And the thing about Q is that Q Q's
behavior on P was the opposite of P's
behavior on P.
I mean, that's how we designed Q
specifically
so that Q on P
had the opposite behavior as P on P.
Okay, so now, of course, what do we do?
Well, the same thing that Russell did
and and so forth and Cantor, we we ask,
"Well, what would Q do on Q?"
And because of this opposite behavior, Q
would halt on Q if and only if Q does
not halt on Q, which is the
contradiction because Q has to have the
opposite behavior on Q than Q does, but
that's just contradictory. What a
beautiful proof. It's absolutely
beautiful, yeah, I agree. And it's
following the same logic of Russell and
Cantor. I mean, going back to Cantor,
basically.
Cuz Russell is also quoting Cantor in
his letter to Frege.
So, therefore, the conclusion is that
the halting problem is not computably
decidable.
And now we can immediately prove Gödel's
theorem using this, actually. It's an
immediate consequence. So, why don't we
just do that? I view this as the
simplest proof
of Gödel's theorem.
You don't need the Gödel sentence to
prove Gödel's theorem. You can do it
with the halting problem.
So, suppose
that we could write down a computable
axiomatization of all of the true facts
of elementary mathematics,
meaning arithmetic and finite
combinatorial things such as Turing
machine computations and so on. So, in
fact, all those finite combinatorial
processes are formalizable inside
arithmetic with the standard
arithmetization coding process. But let
me just be a little bit informal and
say, "Suppose we could write down a
complete theory of elementary finite
mathematics."
So, we have a an axiomatization of that
theory.
Then we could produce all possible
theorems from those axioms in the way
that I was describing earlier with
Hilbert's program. I mean, if we had a
complete theory of elementary
mathematics, we could construct a
theorem enumeration machine that
produced all the theorems and only the
theorems from that theory.
So now, I have this theorem enumeration
device on my desk,
and I announce that I'm open for
business to solve the halting problem.
So, you give me a program and input that
you want to run that program on,
and I'm going to answer the halting
problem. And the way I'm going to do it
is I'm just going to wait for the
statement coming out of the theorem
enumeration device that asserts either
that P does halt on that input or I wait
for the statement that P does not halt
on that input. And one of them's going
to happen because it was a complete
theory that was enumerating all the true
statements of elementary mathematics.
So, therefore, if I had such a system, I
could solve the halting problem. But we
already proved that you cannot solve the
halting problem. So, therefore, you
cannot have such a complete theory of
arithmetic. So, that proves Gödel's
theorem. Maybe to take a little bit of a
tangent, can you speak You've written a
wonderful book about proofs and the art
of mathematics. So, what can you say
about proving stuff in mathematics? What
is the process of proof? What are the
tools?
What is the art? What is the science of
proving things in mathematics? So, this
is something I find so wonderful to
teach young mathematicians who are
learning how to become mathematicians
and learning about proof. And I wrote
that book when I was teaching such a
proof writing class in New York.
>> Mhm. So, many universities have such a
course, the proof writing course, which
is usually taken by students who have
learned some mathematics. Usually,
they've completed maybe the calculus
sequence and are making the kind of
transition to higher mathematics.
Which tends to involve much more proof
and it's a kind of challenging step for
them.
So, the many math departments have this
kind of course on proof writing where
the students would get exposed to how to
write proofs.
And I wasn't happy with most of the
other books that exist for those kind of
courses. And the reason was that
they were so often
so dull because they would concentrate
on
like this
the totally uninteresting parts of what
it's like to write a proof, these kind
of mechanistic
procedures about how to write a proof.
You know, if you're going to prove an
implication, then you assume the
hypothesis and argue for the conclusion
and so on. And all of that is true and
fine and that's good to know except if
that's all that you're saying about the
nature of proof, then I don't think
you're really learning very much. So, I
felt that it was possible to have a much
better kind of book, one that was much
more interesting and that had
interesting theorems in it that still
admitted of elementary proofs. So, I
wrote this book um and tried to fill it
with all of the
compelling mathematical statements with
very elementary proofs that exhibited
lots of different proof styles
in it. And so, I found that the students
appreciated it a lot. We should say you
dedicate the book to my students. May
all their theorems be true, proved by
elegant arguments that flow effortlessly
from hypothesis to conclusion while
revealing fantastical mathematical
beauty.
Is there some interesting proofs that
maybe
illustrate
for people outside of mathematics or for
people who just take math classes in
high school and so on?
Uh Yeah, let's do a proof. There's one
in the book. We can talk about it. I
think it's a nice problem.
It's in the discrete math. Yeah, the
5.1, that one.
More pointed at than pointing. Okay. So,
this is the following problem.
Suppose you're gathered with some
friends, you know, in a circle. And you
can point at each other, however you
want, or yourself, whatever. It doesn't
matter.
And you can point at more than one
person, you know, use all your fingers
or your feet or whatever you want. So,
maybe you point at three of your friends
or something and they point at two or
three of their friends or whatever and
one person is pointing at 10 people and
somebody isn't pointing at anybody maybe
or
um and various people are pointed at
also, right? So, the question is
could we arrange a pattern of pointing
so that everyone was more pointed at
than they are pointing at others?
So, in other words, maybe there's seven
people pointing at me, but I'm only
pointing at five people and maybe
there's, you know,
uh 20 people pointing at you, but you're
only pointing at 15 people or something
like that, right? So, I want to know
this is a similar question on Twitter.
For for a group of people on Twitter,
could you arrange
that everyone has more followers than
following?
Yeah, it's the same question.
Mathematically, it's identical.
>> Yeah.
Although, I don't know. It's not
identical because I said you could point
at yourself and I think that's not
Can you follow yourself? No, I don't
think so.
>> think you can. Okay.
So, can you arrange it so that everyone
is more pointed at than pointing?
And in my book, I give a couple of
different proofs of this. I I think I
give an induction proof and then there's
another proof. I think there's three
different proofs in there. But why don't
we just talk about the
my favorite proof.
Suppose it were possible to arrange that
we're all more pointed at than pointing,
okay? Now, what we're going to do, we're
going to agree.
We're going to give a dollar to everyone
that we're pointing at. Yeah. Okay.
And so, what happens?
Everybody made money.
Because I was pointed at by more people
than I'm pointing. So, I got $10, but I
only paid out $7. And similarly, you got
paid $20, but you only paid out $15.
So, if everyone is more pointed at than
pointing, then everyone makes money. But
it it's obviously impossible for us to
make money as a group by just trading
money with ourselves.
>> Mhm. And therefore, it can't be possible
that we're all more pointed at than
pointing.
And this proof illustrates something.
It's one of my habits that I suggest in
the book to anthropomorphize your
mathematical ideas. So,
you should imagine that the mathematical
objects that are playing a role in your
question are people
or active somehow animals or something
that maybe have a will and a goal and so
on. This is this process of
anthropomorphizing. And
and it often makes the problems easier
to understand because we all are
familiar with the fact that it's
difficult to make money.
And the proof is totally convincing
because of our knowledge that we can't
make money as a group by trading
dollars between us, you know, without
any new money coming into the group.
It But that by itself is actually a
difficult mathematical
claim. I mean, if if someone had to
prove that that you can't make money by
trading in within a group.
You know, it can't be that everyone in
the group makes money just by shifting
money around in the group. Maybe you
think that's obvious. And it is obvious
if you think about money. But if you had
asked the question, you know, about
mathematical functions of a certain kind
and so on, then maybe it wouldn't be as
clear as it is when you're talking about
this money thing because of
we we can build on our human experience
about the difficulty of getting money.
And, you know, or other resources. It
doesn't have to be money. It could be
candy, whatever. You know, we just know
that you can't easily get more things in
that kind just by trading within a
group. And we should say that sometimes
the power of proof is such that the
non-obvious can be shown and then over
time that becomes obvious. So, in the
context of money or social systems,
there's a bunch of
uh things that are non-obvious. And the
whole point is that proof can guide us
to the to the truth, to the accurate
description of reality. We just proved a
a property of money.
It's interesting to think about well,
what if there were infinitely many
people in your in your group?
Then it's not true anymore. The the the
theorem fails. In fact, you can arrange
that everyone is strictly more pointed
at than pointing. And also, you can it
if everyone has
uh has even just one dollar bill
then you can arrange that afterwards
everyone has infinitely many dollar
bills. Cuz in terms of cardinality,
that's the same. It's just say countable
infinity in each case. If you had
countably many friends and everyone has
one dollar bill, then you can arrange a
pattern of passing those dollar bills
amongst each other so that afterwards
everyone has infinitely many dollar
bills.
What you need is for each person to be
attached to, you know, one of the train
cars or something. So, us think of
everyone is coming from Hilbert's train.
But also think of them as fitting into
Hilbert's hotel. So, just have everyone
on the nth car give all their money to
the person who ends up in the nth room.
So, they each give one dollar to that
person. So, afterwards that person has
infinitely many dollars, but everyone
only paid out one dollar.
So, it's a way of making it happen.
To what degree, sticking on the topic of
infinity,
should we think of infinity as something
real?
That's an excellent question. I mean,
a huge part of the philosophy of
mathematics is about this kind of
question. The what is the nature of
the existence of mathematical objects?
Including infinity. But I think asking
about infinity specifically is
isn't that different than asking about
the number five? What is
What does it mean for the number five to
exist? What What are the numbers really,
right? This
This is the
maybe one of the fundamental questions
of mathematical ontology. I mean,
there's many different positions to take
on the question of the nature of the
existence of mathematical objects or
abstract objects in in general.
And there's a certain kind of
conversation that sometimes happens when
you do that. Um
And it goes something like this.
Sometimes people find it problematic to
talk about the existence of abstract
objects such as numbers. And there seems
to be a kind of wish that we could give
an account of the existence of numbers
or other mathematical objects or
abstract objects that was more like
you know, the existence of of tables and
chairs and rocks and so on.
Um And so, there seems to be this desire
to reduce mathematical existence to
something, you know, that we can
experience physically in in the real
world.
Um But my attitude about this attempt
is that it's very backward, I think,
because
I don't think we have such a clear
existence of the nature of physical
objects, actually. I mean, we all have
experience about existing in the
physical world as we must because we do
exist in the physical world, but
I don't know of any
satisfactory account of what it means to
exist physically. I mean, if I ask you,
say,
imagine uh
you know, a certain kind of
steam locomotive, you know, and I
describe the engineering of it and the
weight of it and the nature of the gear
linkages and and
you know, and I show you schematic
drawings of the whole design and so on
and you know, we talk in detail about
every single detailed aspect of this
steam locomotive.
But then, suppose after all that
conversation, I say, "Okay, now I would
like you to tell me, what would it mean
for it to exist physically?" I mean, as
opposed to just being an imaginary steam
locomotive.
Then, what what
what could you possibly say about it? I
mean, except by saying, "Oh, I just mean
that it exists in the physical world."
But what does that mean? That's the
question, right? It's not an answer to
the question. That is the question.
Uh so,
I don't think that there's anything
sensible that we can say about the
nature of physical existence. It has a
profound mystery. In fact,
it becomes more and more mysterious the
more physics we we know. I mean,
back in, say, Newtonian physics, then
one had a picture of the nature of
physical objects as, you know, little
billiard balls or something or maybe
they're infinitely divisible or
something like that.
Okay, but then this picture is upset
with the atomic theory of matter and but
then that picture is upset when we
realize that the atoms actually can be
split and consist of electrons and
protons and neutrons and so on. But then
that picture is upset when we realize
that those things themselves are built
out of quarks and leptons and so on. And
who knows what's coming. And
furthermore, all of those things, the
nature of their existence is actually as
wave functions in in uh you know, some
cloud of probability and so on. And so,
it just becomes more and more and more
mysterious the more we learn and not at
all clarifying. And so, the the nature
of what it means to say that, you know,
there's an apple on my desk and to give
an account of what that physical
existence really is at bottom, I think,
is totally absent. Whereas we do seem to
have a good
a much more satisfactory account of the
nature of abstract existence. I mean, I
can talk about the nature of the empty
set. You know, this is the predicate
which is never true or something like
that. I can I can talk about those kind
of logical properties or the singleton
of the empty set and so on. I mean, of
course, it's very difficult if you go
very far with it, but the point is that
it doesn't get more and more mysterious
the more that you say it. It becomes
only more and more clear.
And so,
so it seems to me that um we don't
really have any understanding of what
the physical world is as opposed to the
abstract world. And it's the abstract
world where existence is much more
clear.
It is very true
that we don't know anything about the
soda bottle or the steam locomotive just
cuz we can poke at it. Again, we
anthropomorphize and that's actually get
gets us into trouble sometimes because
I'm not feeling the quantum mechanics
when I'm touching it. That's right. And
therefore, it's easy to forget and feel
like this is real
and
mathematical objects are not. But you're
you're making the opposite argument. And
you draw the things you between numerals
and numbers, which numerals are the
representation of the the number on the
page and so on.
But could you say that a number is real?
Do they Do numbers exist?
I I happen to think so. I mean, I'm on
the side of realism in mathematics and I
think that that these abstract objects
do have a real existence in a way that
we can give an account of in a way I
just tried to describe.
>> So, like you describe it as
um as a size of a set
>> Well, there's different ways to
understand the nature of four. I mean,
actually, this gets into the question of
of structuralism, which is maybe
a good place to talk about it. What is
structuralism?
>> Structuralism is a philosophical
position in in mathematics or the
philosophy of mathematics by which one
emphasizes that what's important about
mathematical objects is not what they're
made out of or what their substance or
essence is, but rather how they function
in a mathematical structure. And so,
what I call the structuralist attitude
in mathematics is that
we should only care about our
mathematical structures up to
isomorphism. If I have a mathematical
structure of a certain kind and I make
an exact copy of it using different
individuals as to form the elements of
that structure,
then the isomorphic copy is just as good
mathematically and there's no important
mathematical difference that would ever
arise from from working with this
isomorphic copy instead of the original
structure. And so, therefore, that's
another way of saying that the substance
of individuals, you know, in a
mathematical structure is irrelevant
with regard to any mathematical property
of that structure.
And so,
so to ask a question like, "What is the
number four really?"
is an anti-structuralist thing because
what you know, if you have a if you have
a structure, say, the natural numbers,
you know, with all the numbers in it, 0
1 2 3 4 and so on, then
I could replace the number four with
something else, like, you know, this
bottle of water
could play the role of the number four
in that structure and it would be
isomorphic.
And it wouldn't matter at all for any
mathematical purpose to use this
alternative mathematical system. You
know, that's to say that we don't care
what the number four is really. That is
irrelevant. What The only thing that
matters is
what are the properties of the number
four in a given mathematical system, you
know, and recognizing that there are
other isomorphic copies of that system
and the properties of the of that other
system's number four are going to be
identical to the property of the
properties of this system's number four
with regard to any question that's
important about the number four. But
those questions won't be about essence.
So,
so in a sense, structuralism is a kind
of
anti-essentialism in mathematics. So, is
it fair to think of numbers as a kind of
pointer
to a deep underlying structure?
Yeah, I think so because
I guess part of the point of
structuralism is that it doesn't make
sense to consider mathematical objects
or individuals
in isolation. What's interesting and
important about mathematical objects is
how they interact with each other and
how they behave in a system. And so,
maybe one wants to think about the
structural role that the objects play,
you know, in in a larger system a larger
structure.
There's a famous question that Frege had
asked, actually, when he was looking
into the nature of numbers because in
his logicist program, right, he was
trying to reduce all mathematics to
logic.
And in that process,
he was referring to the Cantor-Hume
principle that, you know, whenever two
sets are equinumerous, then they have
the same number of elements. I mean, if
and only if. And he founded his theory
of number on on this principle. But he
recognized that well, there was
something that dissatisfied him about
that situation, which is that the
Cantor-Hume principle
does not seem to give you a criteria for
which things are numbers. It only tells
you a kind of identity criteria for when
are two numbers equal to each other.
Well, two numbers are equal just in case
the sets of those sizes are
equinumerous. So, that's the criteria
for number identity.
But it's not a criteria for what is a
number.
And so, this problem has become known as
the Julius Caesar problem because Frege
said, "We don't seem to have any way of
telling
from the Hume principle whether Julius
Caesar is a number or not."
So, he's asking about the essence of
number and whether
of course, one has the sense that
he he picked maybe what he was trying to
present as a ridiculous example because
maybe you have the idea that well,
obviously, Julius Caesar is not a number
and there's a lot of philosophical
writing that seems to take that line,
also, that obviously, the answer is that
Julius Caesar is not a number. But the
structuralist disagree with that
position. The structuralist attitude is
look, you give me a number system. If
Julius Caesar isn't a number,
then
I can just let's take the number 17 out
of that system and plug in Julius Caesar
for that role. And now I've got a new
number system and now Julius Caesar
happens to be the number 17. And that's
totally fine. Yeah, so the point of
structuralism is um
is that the question of whether Julius
Caesar a number or not is irrelevant to
mathematics. It is irrelevant because it
is not about structure.
It's about this essence of the
mathematical objects. Mhm. So,
um so that's the structuralist criticism
of Frege's point.
You've kind of made the case that uh you
can say more concrete things about the
existence of objects in mathematics than
you can in our physical reality about
which to us human brains
things are obvious and not. So, how
what's more real? The reality we see
with our eyes or the reality we can
express
uh in mathematical theorems? I'm not
quite sure. I mean,
I'd live entirely in the platonic realm
and I don't really understand the
physical universe at all. So, I don't
have strong views.
Let's talk about the platonic realm. Is
it like because you live there?
Is it real?
Oh, yeah. Totally. Yeah. This is the
realist position in mathematics is that
abstract objects have a real existence.
And okay, what's meant by that is that
there there's some sense of existence in
which those objects can be regarded as
real. How should we think about that?
How should we try to visualize that?
What does it mean to live
amongst abstract objects? Right. Cuz
life is finite.
We're
all afraid of death with
fall in love with other physical
manifestations of
objects.
Right.
And you're telling me that
maybe reality actually exists elsewhere
and this is all just a projection.
Well, I mean
>> from the abstract realm. Do abstract
objects exist in a place and at a time?
That's very debatable, I think.
>> Right. And what does place and time
mean?
>> Yeah. So So, what's more real? Physics
or uh
the the mathematical platonic space?
Well, the mathematical platonic realm is
I'm not sure I would say it's more real,
but I'm saying we understand the reality
of it in a much deeper and more Yeah. a
more convincing way. I don't think we
understand the nature of physical
reality very well at all. And I think
most people aren't even scratching the
surface of the question as I intend to
be asking it. So, you know, obviously we
understand physical reality. I mean, I
knock on the table and so on and we know
all about what it's like to, you know,
have a birthday party or to drink a
martini or whatever. And And so, we we
we have a deep understanding of existing
in the physical world.
But maybe understanding is the wrong
word. We have a experience of living in
the world and riding bicycles and all
those things. But I don't think we
actually have an understanding at all. I
mean, very, very little of the nature of
physical existence. I think it's a
profound mystery.
Whereas, I think that we do have
something
a little better of an understanding of
the nature of mathematical existence and
abstract existence. So, that's the how I
would describe the point. Somehow it
feels like
we're approaching some deep
truth from different
directions.
And we just haven't traveled as far in
the physics world as we have in the
mathematical world. Maybe I could hope
that someone will give, you know,
the convincing account. But it seems to
be a profound mystery to me. I I can't
even imagine what it would be like to
give an account of physical existence.
>> Yeah, I wonder like a thousand years
from now as physics progresses, what
this same conversation would look like.
>> Right. That would be quite interesting.
Do you think there's breakthroughs a
thousand years from now on the
mathematics side? Cuz we've just
discussed and we'll return to
a lot of turmoil a century ago. Right.
Uh do you think there's more turmoil to
be had?
It's interesting to me because I have my
feet in two worlds of mathematics and
philosophy.
And to compare the differences between
these subjects.
And one of the one of the big there's
many cultural differences, but one of
the big cultural differences is towards
the idea of progress in the subject.
Because mathematics has huge progress.
We simply understand the mathematical
ideas much, much better.
You continually improving our
understanding and there's growth in
knowledge. We understand the nature of
infinity now better than they did a
hundred years ago. I mean, definitely
better.
And they understood it better a hundred
years ago than they did, you know, for
the previous thousands of years and so
on. So, in almost every part of
mathematics, there's improved
understanding of the core issues. So
much so that um you know, the the
questions at hand become totally
different and the fields sort of moves
on to more difficult uh interesting
questions. Whereas, in philosophy,
there's
that's a little bit true that there's
progress. But meanwhile, it's also true
that there are these eternal questions
that have been with us for thousands of
years. And
in fact, so much so that you can find a
lot of philosophers arguing that the
important contribution of philosophy is
in asking the questions rather than
answering them. Because it's hopeless to
answer them. I mean, the nature of these
deep philosophical questions is so
difficult. Less of a sense of progress
is what I'm trying to say. Um
I don't see any reason to think that the
progress in mathematics, in the growth
in our mathematical understanding and
knowledge won't simply continue. And so,
a thousand years from now, maybe the
mathematics that they will be doing at
that time
would probably be completely
unrecognizable to me. I maybe wouldn't
even begin to understand what they're
talking about even without sort of
witnessing, you know, the intervening uh
developments. Um so, if you bring
someone from ancient times to today,
they maybe wouldn't even understand what
we're talking about with some of the
questions. But I feel that
you know, if Archimedes came and we were
able to communicate, I I think I would
be able to tell him, you know, about
some of the things that are going on uh
in mathematics now and and maybe
you know,
or or anyone from that time, I mean. So,
uh so, I think it is possible to
have this kind of progress
even when the subject kind of shifts
away from the earlier concerns as a
result of the progress, basically.
To take a tangent on a tangent, uh since
you mentioned philosophy maybe
potentially more about the questions and
maybe mathematics is about the answers,
I have to say you are a legend on
MathOverflow, which is like Stack
Overflow, but for math. You are ranked
number one all time on there with
currently over 246,000 reputation
points.
How do you approach answering difficult
questions on there?
Well,
MathOverflow has really been one of the
great pleasures of my of my life. I've
really enjoyed it. I mean, and I've
learned so much from interacting on
MathOverflow. It's
um
I've been on there
since 2009, which was shortly after it
started. I mean, it wasn't exactly at
the start, but a little bit later.
Um and
uh
and
I think I it gives you the stats for how
many characters I've typed and I don't
know how many million it is, but uh
uh there's enormous amount of
uh um
time that I've spent thinking about
those questions and it has really just
been amazing to me.
How do you find the questions that grab
you? And how do you go about answering
them? So, I'm interested in any question
that I find interesting. So, and it's
not all questions. So, sometimes certain
kinds of questions just don't appeal to
me that much. So, you go outside of set
theory as well. So,
I think when I first joined
MathOverflow, I was
I was basically one of the only one of
the few people in logic who was
answering. I mean, there were other
people who know some logic, particularly
from category theory and other parts of
mathematics
um that aren't in the most traditional
parts of logic. But they were answering
some of the logic questions. So, I
really found myself able to make a
contribution in those very early days
by engaging with the
logic-related questions. But there
weren't many logic people asking
questions, either. But what I found was
that there was an enormous amount of
interest in
topics that were logic-adjacent.
So, a question would arise, you know, in
group theory, but it had a logic aspect
or in analysis or whatever. And there
would be some logic angle on it. And
what I found was that I was often able
to figure out an answer um by learning
enough about that other subject matter.
This is what was so rewarding for me is
because basically I had to learn enough.
My expertise My main expertise was
logic. But someone would ask a question,
you know, that that was
about, say, the axiom of choice in this
other subject matter or the continuum
hypothesis or something like that in an
in the other subject matter.
And I would have to learn enough about
that other subject and the context of
the question in order to answer. And I
was often able to do that. And so, I was
quite happy to do that. And And also, I
learned a lot by doing that because
I had to learn about these other problem
areas. And so, it really allowed me to
grow enormously as a mathematician. To
give some examples of questions you've
answered, what are some reasonable
sounding statements that are independent
of ZFC?
What are the most misleading alternate
definitions in top mathematics? Is the
analysis as taught in universities in
fact the analysis of definable numbers?
Solutions to the continuum hypothesis?
Most unintuitive application of the
axiom of choice? Non-trivial theorems
with trivial proofs?
Reductio ad absurdum or the
contrapositive?
What is a chess piece mathematically? We
should say you've worked quite a bit on
infinite chess, which we should
definitely talk about. It's awesome.
You've worked on so many fascinating
things. Has philosophy ever clarified
mathematics?
Why do we have two theorems when one
implies the other?
And of course, just as an example,
you've given a really a great, almost
historical answer on the topic of the
continuum hypothesis. And maybe that's a
good place to go. We've touched on a
little bit, but it would be nice to lay
out what is the continuum
uh hypothesis that Cantor struggled
with, and I would love to also speak to
the psychology of his his own life
story, his own struggle with it. It's
The human side of mathematics is also
fascinating. Yes. So, what is the
continuum hypothesis?
>> So, the continuum hypothesis is is the
question that arises so naturally
whenever you prove that there's more
than one size of infinity.
So, Cantor proved that the infinity of
the real numbers is strictly larger
than the infinity of the natural
numbers.
But, immediately when you prove that,
one wants to know, well, is there
anything in between? I mean, what could
be a more natural question to ask
immediately after that? And so, Cantor
did ask it, and he spent his whole life
thinking about this question.
Um And so, the continuum hypothesis is
is the assertion that there is no
infinity in between the natural numbers
and the real numbers.
And of course, Cantor knew many sets of
real numbers. Everything in between, I
mean, everything that's in that interval
would be equinumerous with some set of
real numbers. But, we know lots of sets
of real numbers. I mean, there's
all these various closed sets, Cantor
sets, so on. There's
Vitali set. We have all kinds of sets of
real numbers. And so, you might think,
well, if the continuum hypothesis is
false, then we've probably seen the the
set already. We just have to prove, you
know, that it's strictly in between.
But, it turned out that for all the sets
that anyone ever could define or pick
out or observe, for all the sets of real
numbers, it was always the case either
that they were countable, in which case
they're equinumerous with the natural
numbers or else finite,
um
or they were fully equinumerous with the
whole real line.
And so, they were never strictly in
between. I mean, you're in the situation
and you have hundreds, thousands of sets
that are candidates to be in between,
but in every single case, you can prove
it's on one side or the other,
and not strictly in between.
And so, in every situation where you're
able to figure out whether it's in
between or not,
it's always never strictly in between.
Now, Cantor was obsessed with this.
I think he was. Yeah, I'm not a
historian, so I don't know the exact
history.
>> everything I've seen, it seems to be the
question that broke him, huh?
Um
I mean, just struggling with
different opinions on the hypothesis
within himself,
and desperately chasing
uh trying to prove it. So, he had a
program for proving it, which has been
affirmed in a certain respect. Of
course, the the continuum hypothesis
holds for for open sets. That's easy to
see. If you have an open interval,
then this is fully equinumerous with the
whole real line. Any interval is
equinumerous with the whole line.
Because all you would need is a
function, you know, like the arc tangent
function or something that maps the
whole real line
into into an interval.
And that's a one-to-one function.
So, we know the open sets have the
property that their non-trivial open
sets are all fully equinumerous with the
whole real line. So, never strictly in
between.
But, remarkably, Cantor proved it also
for the closed sets. And that is using
what's called the Cantor-Bendixson
theorem. So, it's quite a remarkable
result.
It's definitely not obvious.
And in this theorem, actually, was the
origin of the ordinals. Cantor had to
invent the ordinals in order to make
sense of his Cantor-Bendixson process.
Can you define the open and the closed
set in this context?
>> Oh, yeah, sure.
So, a set of reals is open if every
point that it contains is surrounded by
a little interval of points. The whole
tiny little interval.
But, if that tiny little interval is
already, just by itself, equinumerous
with the whole line, so that's why the
question is sort of easy for open sets.
A closed set is a complement of an open
set.
And there's a lot of closed sets that
are really complicated, of varying
sizes. So, of course, any closed
interval is a closed set, but it's not
only those. There's also things like the
Cantor set, which you get by omitting
middle thirds. Maybe some people have
seen this construction. Or you can
imagine sort of randomly taking a lot of
little tiny open intervals, you know,
all over the line, and so on. So, that
altogether would be an open set, and the
complement of it would be a closed set.
So, you can imagine just kind of tossing
down these open intervals, and what's
left over is the closed set. Those sets
can be quite complicated. And they can
have isolated points. For example, if
the two open intervals were were just
kissing and leaving only the one point
between them. But, also, you can have
you can have sequences that are
converging to a point. That would also
be a closed set, or a convergent
sequences of convergent sequences, and
so on. That would be a closed set, also.
The Cantor set is constructed by
iteratively removing open intervals,
middle thirds, like you mentioned, from
the interval.
And trying to see, can we do a thing
that that goes in between? Right. So,
the question would be,
can you produce a set
that has an intermediate size, an
intermediate cardinality, right?
And Cantor proved with a closed set, no,
it's impossible.
Every closed set is either countable or
equinumerous with the whole real line.
Mhm.
And what
what the Cantor program for solving the
continuum hypothesis was was
a sort of working up. So, he did it for
open sets and for closed sets, and you
sort of work up. Maybe he wants to go
into what are called the Borel sets,
which are sort of combinations of open
and closed sets.
Um and there's a vast hierarchy of of
Borel complexity.
And and it turns out that the continuum
hypothesis has been proved also for the
Borel sets in this hierarchy.
But, then one wants to go beyond. What
about more complicated sets? So, there's
this hierarchy of complexity for sets of
real numbers.
And Cantor's idea was to sort of work
your way up the hierarchy by proving
that the continuum hypothesis
was more and more true for those more
and more complicated sets based on our
understanding of the earlier cases.
And
and that has been
carried out to an a remarkable degree.
It turns out that one needs one begins
to need large cardinal assumptions,
though, in order to get to the higher
realms, even at the level of projective
hierarchy,
which are sets that you can define by
using quantifiers over the real numbers
themselves.
So, you get this hierarchy on top of the
Borel hierarchy,
the hierarchy of projectively definable
sets.
Um and it turns out that if you have
enough large cardinals, then the
projective sets also are
always either countable or equinumerous
with the whole real line.
And and then one can try to go beyond
this, and so on. So, so I view all of
those results, which came, you know, in
the past 50 years, um the later ones,
as fulfilling this Cantor idea that goes
back, you know, 120 years, to his idea
that we would prove the continuum
hypothesis by establishing more and more
instances for greater and greater
complexity of sets.
But, of course,
even with what we know now, it's hasn't
fully succeeded, and it can't because
the hierarchy of complexity doesn't
include all sets of real numbers. Some
of them are sort of transcending this
hierarchy completely,
in a way. And
so so, the the program can't ever fully
be successful, especially in light of
the independence results. Yeah, well,
spoiler alert, can you go to the
independence result? Sure. So, what what
does that mean? Well,
uh so, the continuum hypothesis was
shown to be independent from the ZFC
axioms of mathematics.
>> Right.
So, the ZFC axioms were the axioms that
were put forth first by Zermelo in 1908
in regard to his proof of the well-order
theorem using the axiom of choice.
That that wasn't fully ZFC at that time.
It was just Zermelo theory because he
sort of There was a kind of missing
axiom. The replacement axiom and the
foundation axiom were added later, and
that's what makes the Zermelo-Fraenkel
axiomatization, which became sort of
standard.
Actually, there's another aspect, which
is Zermelo's original theory allowed for
the existence of urelements, or these
atoms, mathematical objects that are not
sets,
but out of which we build the set
theoretic universe.
Whereas,
set theorists today generally don't use
urelements at all.
I
I argue that um
it's really the philosophy of
structuralism that leads them to omit
the urelements because it turns out that
if you adopt ZFC axioms with urelements,
ZFCU, it's called, or ZFA,
then any structure that exists, any
mathematical structure that exists in
that set theoretic universe with the
atoms, is isomorphic to a structure that
doesn't use the atoms at all.
And therefore, you don't need the atoms
if you're a structuralist because you
only care about the structures up to
isomorphism anyways, and the and the
theory is simply more elegant and
clearer without the atoms. They're just
not needed.
And so, that's why today, when we talk
about set theory, generally, we talk
about the atom-free version, and ZFC has
no urelements.
Okay.
So, we formulate the ZFC axioms of set
theory. These are expressing the main
principal ideas that we have about the
nature of sets and set existence.
And
Cantor had asked about the continuum
hypothesis
in the late 19th century,
and it remained open,
totally open,
until 1938. And we should mention, I
apologize, that it was the number one
problem in the Hilbert 23 set of
problems formulated at the beginning of
the century. That's right. Maybe you can
comment on why did he put that as number
one? So, right. So, Hilbert had
introduced at his famous address at the
turn of the century this list of
problems that
he thought
could guide or were important to
consider in the
coming century of mathematics. I mean,
that's how people talk about it now,
although I'm not sure at all. Of course,
I I can't really speak for Hilbert at
all, but if you were a very prominent
mathematician,
I find it a little hard to believe that
Hilbert would have conceived of his list
in the same way that we now take his
list. I mean,
having observed the century unfold, we
know that that list of 23 problems did
in fact guide whole research programs,
and it was extremely important and
influential. But, at the time Hilbert
would have no reason to think that that
would be true, and he was just giving a
lecture and
uh had a list of problems that he
thought were very important. And so, I
tend to I would find it more reasonable
to think that he was just making a list
of problems that he thought were
extremely interesting and important and
fundamental in a way without the kind of
um heavy burden of guiding this 20th
century research. Although, it turns out
that in fact that's exactly what they
did.
And we already discussed how Hilbert
Hilbert's views on the nature of set
theory and the fundamental character
that, quote,
where he said, "No one will cast us from
the paradise that Cantor has created for
us." So,
so I think Hilbert was convinced by
Cantor on the importance and the
fundamental nature of the continuum
hypothesis for the foundations of
mathematics, which was a critically
important development for the unity of
mathematics. I mean, before set theory
emerged as the foundation of
mathematics, there were
you know, there there's different
subjects in mathematics. There's
algebra, and there's analysis, real
analysis, and topology, and geometry,
and so on. There's all these disparate
subjects
with their own axioms, separate axioms,
right? And but sometimes it happens like
when you're proving, say, the
fundamental theorem of algebra, you
know, that the complex numbers are an
algebraically closed field, that you can
solve any polynomial equation in.
But, the proof methods for that theorem
come from other parts of mathematics,
you know, there's topological proofs and
so on.
And so,
what is that How does that work? I mean,
if you have totally different axiom
systems, but you're using results from
one subject in another subject, it's
somehow incoherent unless this one
underlying
subject. So, the unity of mathematics
was provided by the existence of a
mathematical foundation like set theory,
and at the time it was set theory.
And so, it's critically important to be
able to have a single theory in which
one views all of mathematics as taking
place to resolve that kind of transfer
and borrowing phenomenon that was
definitely happening.
So, that must have been part of
Hilbert's thinking about why it's so
important to have a uniform foundation,
and set theory was playing that role at
the time. Now, of course, we have other
possible foundations for coming from
category theory or type theory, um and
there's univalent foundations now. So,
there's a set of competing foundations
now. There's no need to just use one
foundation, one set theoretic
foundation. Although, set theory
continues to, in my view, have an
extremely successful metamathematical
analysis as a foundation. I think it's
much more successful in set theory for
any of those other foundations, but um
it's much less amenable, though, to
things like computer proof and so on,
which is part of the motivation to find
these alternative foundations.
So, yeah, okay. So, just talk about
Hilbert, though.
I think he was motivated by the need for
a unifying foundation of mathematics,
and set theory was playing that role.
And the continuum hypothesis is such a
core fundamental question to ask, so it
seems quite natural that he would put it
on the list.
There were other logic-related
questions, though, like Hilbert's 10th
problem is also related to logic. This
is the question about Diophantine
equations, and he asked to provide an
algorithm to decide whether a given
Diophantine equation has solution in the
integers.
So, a Diophantine equation is just I
mean, it's a
maybe a fancy way of talking about
something that's uh easy to understand,
a polynomial equation, except it's not
just one variable, many variables. Um
so, so you have polynomials in several
variables over the integers, and you
want to know, can you solve it?
So, the problem is, as stated by
Hilbert,
provide an algorithm for answering the
question whether a given polynomial
equation has a solution in the integers.
So, he's sort of presuming that there is
an algorithm, but he wants to know, what
is it? What is the algorithm? But, the
the problem was solved by proving that
there is no algorithm. It's an
undecidable problem like the halting
problem.
There is no computable procedure that
will correctly decide whether a given
polynomial equation has a solution in
the integers.
So, that's quite a remarkable
development, I think. So, there were
also there's a few other logic-related
questions on the list.
And so, eventually, continuum hypothesis
was shown to be independent from ZFC
axioms, as we've mentioned. So, what How
does that make you feel?
And what what is independence? What does
that mean?
>> The historical story is really quite
dramatic, I think. Cuz Cantor poses the
question, you know, late 19th century.
>> Mhm.
And then, it's totally open. Hilbert
asks about it, you know, at the turn of
the 20th century. Nobody has any clue.
There's no answer coming.
Until 1938. This is four decades later,
right? So, a long time.
And Gödel, Kurt Gödel, proved
half of it. What he proved is that
if the axioms of set theory are
consistent, then there is a set
theoretic world
where both the axiom of choice
and the continuum hypothesis are true.
So, what he's doing is showing This is
called the constructible universe,
Gödel's L.
So, so he solved This is the same result
where he answers
the safety question of the axiom of
choice, but also for the continuum
hypothesis.
They're true in the same set theoretic
universe.
We get So, if if ZF without the axiom of
choice is consistent, then so is ZFC
plus the continuum hypothesis is the
result. 1938. It's really a such a
beautiful argument. It's just
incredible, I think, because he's he's
building an alternative mathematical
reality. That's the structure of the
proof is that Okay, if if there's any
mathematical reality, if there's any set
theoretic world, then we're going to
build another one, a separate one, a
different one. Maybe different. Maybe
it's the same as the original one. It
could be. If we started already in the
one that he built, then it would be the
same. But, there's no reason to assume
it was the same. So, he he has this kind
of model construction method to build
this alternative set theoretic reality,
the constructible universe. And then he
proves that the axiom of choice is true
there, and also the continuum hypothesis
is true there. And it's just amazing.
Really beautiful argument. Okay. So,
then for the other part of the
independence, that's only half of it,
because
Gödel shows
basically that you can't refute the
continuum hypothesis. But, that's not
the same thing as proving that it's
true.
He showed that
if set theory is consistent
without the continuum hypothesis, then
it's consistent with the continuum
hypothesis. So, that's not the same
thing as proving that it's true.
Yeah. And then it didn't come until 1963
when Paul Cohen invented the method of
forcing
uh and proved that if there's a model of
set theory, then there's a model of set
theory in which the continuum hypothesis
is false.
So, so Cohen also is
giving us this extremely powerful tool
for building alternative mathematical
realities. It's how I think about it.
He's explained to us how to take any set
theoretic world and build another
different one in which the continuum
hypothesis is false.
The forcing extension. It's just such a
fascinating technique, tool of forcing.
Maybe I'm anthropomorphizing it, but it
seems like a way to escape one
mathematical universe into another, or
to expand it, or to alter it. So, to
travel between mathematical universes.
Can you explain the technique of
forcing?
>> all those things. It's so wonderful. I
mean, that's exactly how I think about
it. I mean, And we should mention, maybe
this is a good place to even give a
bigger picture of it. One of your more
controversial ideas in mathematics, as
laid out in the paper the set theoretic
multiverse,
you describe
that uh there may not be one true
mathematics, but rather multiple
mathematical universes, and forcing is
one of the techniques that gets you from
one to the other. So, can you explain
the whole shebang? Yeah, sure. Let's
let's get into it. So,
the the lesson of Cohen's result and
Gödel's result and so on, these
producing these alternative set
theoretic universes.
We've observed that the continuum
hypothesis is independent and the the
axiom of choice is independent of the
other axioms, but but it's not just
those two. We have thousands of
independence results. Practically every
non-trivial statement of infinite
combinatorics is independent of ZFC. I
mean, this is the fact.
Um
it's not universally true. There are
some extremely difficult prominent
results where people proved things in
ZFC. But for the most part, if you ask a
non-trivial question about infinite
cardinalities, then it's very likely to
be independent of ZFC. And and we have
these thousands of arguments, these
forcing arguments that uh are used to
establish that.
And so how should we take that? I mean,
on the one hand
if you have a theory and it doesn't
answer any of the questions that you're
interested in, okay, so what does that
mean?
If you're following what I call the
universe view or the monist view,
you might naturally say, "Well, look,
ZFC is a weak theory and there's there's
the true
set-theoretic reality out there and we
need a better theory cuz the current
theory isn't answering the questions.
Everything's independent."
And so that seems like a quite
reasonable thing to take. If you think
that there is that every set-theoretic
question has a definite answer and
there's a unique set-theoretic truth or
a unique fact of the matter, right? This
is This is the universe view. And by the
way, to reiterate
uh independent means it cannot be proved
or disproved within this axiomatic
system or this theory. Right. Exactly.
So to be independent means you can't
prove it and also you can't prove that
it's false. You can't
>> And you were saying that's why the
statement is so dramatic or sad that
most of the interesting stuff, as you
said, has been shown to be independent.
Right. of ZFC.
>> But but that's an interesting way to put
it, I think, because it reminds me of
this
uh
when I was a graduate student in
Berkeley,
there was another graduate student who
was working with a non-logic professor
in um C*-algebras or something like
this. So it's a part of analysis or
functional analysis.
And they were looking at a question and
it turned out
to be independent of ZFC.
Right. And the attitude of this other
professor was that, "Oh,
I guess I asked the wrong question."
But
my attitude and the attitude of all the
set theorists was, "When you ask a
question that turns out to be
independent, then you asked exactly the
right question because this is the one
you know, it's it's carving nature at
its joints. You're You're adjudicating
the nature of set-theoretic reality by
finding these two realms. You find one
of these dichotomies. You know, there's
the worlds where it's true and the
worlds where it's false. And so when you
ask that question, that's to be
celebrated. It means you asked exactly
the right, interesting, fascinating
question. So it's not a kind of bleak
thing that you you can't prove it and
you can't refute it and that's such a
disaster. Rather, it means that you
found this
this
this cleavage in reality, in
mathematical reality, and it's good to
know about those when they happen.
Carving nature at its joints. So what
can you do about the things
uh that are shown to be independent from
ZFC? So what what are the takeaways?
>> thing is that because of the
incompleteness theorem,
we know that there's going to be for any
theory that we can write down, there's
going to be things that we can't prove,
true things we can't prove in it. So
this those things are going to be
independent.
And so
so we're already aware of the fact that
there will always be these independence
phenomenon for any theory that we write.
And furthermore, some of those theories,
we won't even be able to prove that
they're consistent, you know, like the
consistency of the ontology. So that's
called the consistency strength
hierarchy.
So it's a direct consequence of Gödel's
second incompleteness theorem that
for any theory we can write down, then
towering over it is this incredibly tall
tower of consistency strength where the
strength and theories aren't just adding
another axiom, but they're adding
another axiom even whose consistency was
not provable in the previous uh layers
of the hierarchy.
And so how lucky we are to find the
large cardinal axioms that instantiate
exactly this
feature of increasing consistency
strength, this unending
and extremely tall
hierarchy of consistency strength of
axioms. And it exactly fulfills the
prediction that that Gödel's theorem
makes about that kind of thing. Except
that's the axioms in the large cardinal
hierarchy aren't
you know, metalogical self-referential
statements of the form that sometimes
arise in the Gödel analysis, but rather
they're professing
existence of big infinities, these large
cardinal axioms. And so
it's such a welcome development. And
yet, it's also known that the continuum
hypothesis is independent of all of the
known large cardinal axioms. So
none of the large cardinal axioms
we can prove none of them can settle the
continuum hypothesis. So
so the independence phenomenon is still
there for things like the like the
continuum hypothesis and the cardinal um
uh
cardinal combinatorics that I'm
mentioning.
>> this incredible hierarchy
of axiomatic systems that are more
powerful than the ZFC. More more
powerful than ZFC and then more powerful
than that, more powerful than that, and
so on. It keeps going forever and
it will never be finished. And still to
this day, the continuum hypothesis is
not It's not settled by any of the large
cardinal axioms.
Wow.
What does that mean? How does that make
you feel? Is that Will will it ever be
settled?
>> Yeah, well, it's part of my multiverse
view, I guess. So uh which we started by
I was describing the universe view,
which is the view that, "Look, there are
facts of the matter about all of these
questions and that it will turn out if
you're a universe view person," which
I'm not,
but if you are, then you will hold that
there is a right answer to the continuum
hypothesis question and there's a right
answer
um to the large cardinal questions and
so on. And that what we should be aiming
to do is figure out this one true set
theory. Okay.
In contrast,
uh I take the developments of set theory
over the past half century or more as
evidence
that there isn't such a unique
set-theoretic reality. Rather,
what we've been doing for decades now is
producing more and more alternative
set-theoretic universes in which the
fundamental truths are differing from
one to the other. And and that that
that is the answer to the continuum
hypothesis question, the fact that
given any model of set theory, there's a
forcing extension where it the continuum
hypothesis is true and another one where
it's false. You can sort of turn it on
and off like a light switch. And that's
the fundamental nature of the continuum
hypothesis is that you can have it or
you can have the negation as you like
within a very closely related
set-theoretic world. Wherever you happen
to be living, there's a closely related
one where CH is true, where the
continuum hypothesis is true,
and one where it's false.
And that itself is a kind of answer.
It's not a singularist answer, a
universe view answer. It's a pluralist
answer. And and this
led me to my views on the multiverse
view of set theory and pluralist truth,
namely the the fundamental nature of
set-theoretic truth
has this plural character in that
there isn't a singular meaning to the
fundamental terms, but rather there's
this choice of alternative set-theoretic
universes that have different truths. So
what does the multiverse view of
mathematics enable you to do?
What does it empower you to do and what
are the limitations? What are the things
it breaks about mathematics as a field,
as a space of knowledge?
And uh what does it enable? First of
all, I guess one should say that
these different philosophical positions
that you might take in the philosophy of
set theory like the multiverse view or
the universe view,
we don't ever disagree about the
mathematics. We're all agreeing on what
the theorems are. It's a question of
philosophical perspective on the
underlying meaning or the context or
really
what is a philosophy of mathematics for,
right? And um I mean, if you look back
in history, for example, like to the
time of calculus with Newton and
Leibniz, right?
They famously developed the ideas of
calculus uh using their concepts of
infinitesimals and
and those foundations were roundly
mocked by Bishop Berkeley and so on who
talked about, you know, "What are these
same evanescent increments? And shall we
not call them the ghosts of departed
quantities?" And and uh
but the foundations really were kind of
completely suspect, I think, at the
time. Uh and and the foundations of
infinitesimal calculus really only
became rigorous in 1950s or so with the
development of non-standard analysis and
Robinson's work. Okay, so the point I'm
trying to make is that do you need
a robust, rigorous foundation of
mathematics to make enduring insights
in mathematics?
And the answer, regrettably, is
apparently not because in calculus,
even with that lousy creaky foundation
of infinitesimals not even
well understood that Newton and Leibniz
had, they proved all the fundamental
theorems of calculus and you know, they
had all the main insights
in those early days with that extremely
bad foundation.
And so that shows you something about
the relevance of the kind of
foundational views on mathematics and
and how important they are for
mathematical developments and progress
and insight. I mean, because I view
those early mathematical developments in
calculus as
genuinely mathematical and extremely
important
and insightful even though the
foundations weren't any good um from you
know, by contemporary perspectives.
Okay. So
So rather So when it comes to the
philosophy of set theory and the dispute
between the the universe view and the
pluralism
um
my view is that the choice of the
philosophical perspective doesn't
actually have to do with the
mathematical developments directly at
all. Rather,
it tells us
where should set theory go? What kind of
set theory should we be looking at? What
kind of questions should we be asking?
So if if you have a universe mentality,
the universe view,
then you're going to be pushed to try to
find and articulate the nature of the
one true set theoretic universe.
And I think that remark is really well
borne out by the developments with Hugh
Woodin, who's one of the most prominent
um mathematicians
and philosophers with the universe view
and his theory of ultimate L and so on.
And he's really striving
>> your advisor? He was also my supervisor,
yeah, my graduate supervisor. Which is a
a personal story as well.
>> This this fundamental dispute, yeah, on
this question. But he is um
has a very strong and successful
research program sort of
trying to give legs to finding the
nature of the one true set theoretic
universe.
And it's driving the questions that he's
asking and the mathematical programs
that he's pursuing. Whereas, if you have
a pluralist view as I do,
then you're going to be led and
attracted to questions that have to do
with the interaction of different set
theoretic universes or maybe you want to
understand the nature of how are the
models of set theory related to their
forcing extensions and so on. And so
this led to things
um uh that I call, say, set theoretic
potentialism, where you think about a
set theoretic universe
uh in a potentialist way, not in the
sense of potential infinity directly
because all of these universes have
infinite sets inside them already, but
they're potentialist in the sense that
we could have more sets, the universe
could be wider and taller and so on, you
know, by forcing or by extending upward.
Um and so we want to understand the
nature of this uh
realm of set theoretic universes. And
And that's quite some exciting work. And
so with Benedikt Löwe and I, we proved
some theorems on the modal logic of
forcing and set theoretic potentialism
under end extension. I've done a bunch
of work on this topic.
And And also um I mounted uh together
with Günter Fuchs and Jonas Reitz, who
is one of my own PhD students,
the topic of set theoretic geology,
which is studying
it's taking the metaphor of forcing. I
mean, in forcing you have the ground
model and the forcing extension.
And when I was first working with Jonas,
uh
he said, "I want to undo forcing.
I want to go backwards."
And I at first said, "But Jonas, it
doesn't work that way. You start in the
model in the ground model and you go
out. You go to the bigger one. You know,
that's how forcing works." And he said,
"No, no, I want to go backwards." And
And so he was quite persistent,
actually. And um um And so finally I
said, "Okay, let's let's do it. Let's
take it seriously." And so we sat down
and and and started thinking, you know,
more precisely and carefully and deeply
about the nature of
taking a set theoretic universe and
seeing where did it come from by
forcing, which was a new way of thinking
about forcing at the time.
>> Like reverse engineering the forcing?
Yeah, something like that. We Forcing is
a way of producing a new universe and so
you could start somewhere and go to that
you new universe or you could look where
you are and say, "Well, look, I got here
by doing that already in the past." Mhm.
So we defined models of the um
bedrock model and ground, you know,
sort of undoing the forcing. And And
really it was quite fruitful and I view
this as part of the sort of pluralist
perspective, except the difference is
that set theoretic geology is amenable
to the universe view. So even though the
work was inspired by this philosophical
view
on the multiverse view,
nevertheless, the central ideas of
geology have now been picked up by the
people with the research program in the
universe view
um because it turns out that set
theoretic geology is helping them or us
to discover the nature of the one true
universe, relates to its mantle. There's
this concept of the set theoretic mantle
that I had introduced
in a way that is extremely interesting.
And so it's historically quite funny, I
think, because this research program
that grew entirely out of the pluralist
point of view
uh ended up being picked up by the
universe point of view uh research
program in a in a way that is quite
important.
Can you prove something
in the world that you arrived at through
forcing and then take some of that back
to the ground model? Yeah, absolutely.
And that's a really powerful argument
method, actually. People often want to
do that. You
Suppose you're in some set theoretic
context, you know, you could think about
this living in a set theoretic universe.
And you want to prove something in that
universe only, but
maybe one way to do it is to first
construct this forcing extension and
then use the features about this forcing
extension to realize that certain things
must have already been true in the
ground model. And then you throw the
forcing extensions away and you How
cool. Yeah. So this can happen. So to
pick a more elementary example, if you
think about the early days of people
reasoning with the complex numbers
before they really understood them.
So they would have these algebraic
equations that they're trying to solve.
Ex- you know, and they would have the
tools and methods of doing it. But then
in the course of, you know, So they
would have to do things to the
polynomial and change the factors and
and and so on and produce other
polynomials and solve them and so on.
And sometimes they could produce
solutions
in the middle of their construction,
they were led to like the square root of
minus five or something, you know, in
the construction.
And they didn't have any meaning for
that, but they would just do it
symbolically,
you know, and and eventually it would
turn in, you know, because of the
methods that they had, they would
combine and they would cancel and so on.
And all the complex parts would cancel
out and they'd end up with this, you
know,
actual answer, you know, three plus
square root of 17 or whatever. And And
they could check it and it worked. It
was a solution of the original equation.
And so it must have been bewildering to
them because they would start with this
question purely in the real numbers, an
algebraic question, and they would
march on their method and proceed
through the land of nonsense, you know,
with these square roots of negative
numbers, and then end up with an answer
that was real again, that they could
verify was correct.
And And so I view this kind of forcing
argument that I was just describing in a
similar way. You start in in set theory
and you you go to this land of nonsense
in the forcing extension, this imaginary
world, and you argue and you come back.
I mean, you make a consequence in the
ground model. And it's such a beautiful
way of arguing.
So speaking of the land of nonsense, I
have to ask you about surreal numbers,
but first I need another bathroom break.
All right, we're back and there's this
aforementioned
wonderful blog post on the surreal
numbers.
And uh
that uh there's quite a simple surreal
number generation process that can
basically construct all numbers.
So maybe this is a good
spot to uh ask what are surreal numbers
and what is the way we can generate all
numbers?
So the surreal number system is an
amazing an amazingly beautiful
mathematical system that was um
introduced by John Conway. Rest in
peace, one of the great mathematicians
ever. Yes, absolutely.
And I really admire his style of
mathematical thinking and working in
mathematics. And the surreal number
system is a good instance of this. So
So the way I think about the surreal
numbers is um
what it's doing is providing us a number
system that unifies all the other number
systems. So it extends the real numbers.
Well, not only it extends the integers,
the natural numbers and the integers and
the rational numbers and the real
numbers, um but also the ordinals and
the infinitesimals. So they're all
sitting there inside the surreal
numbers.
And
it's this colossal system of numbers.
It's not a set even, it's a proper
class, it turns out, because it contains
all the ordinal numbers.
Um
but it's
generated from nothing by a single rule.
And the rule is, so we're going to
generate the numbers in stages, in
transfinite sequence of stages.
And at every stage, we take the the that
we have so far and in all possible ways
we divide them into two sets, a lower
set and an upper set, or a left set and
a right set.
So, we divide them into these two sets
so that everything in the left set is
less than everything in the right set.
And then at that moment,
we create a new number
that fits in the gap between L and R.
Okay?
That's it. That's all we do.
So, let me say it again.
The rule is we proceed in stages, and at
any stage, then in all possible ways we
divide the numbers we have into two
collections,
the left set and the right set, so that
everything in the left set is less than
everything in the right set.
And we create a new number,
a new surreal number that will fit in
that gap.
Okay. So, for example, we could start.
Well, at the beginning, we don't have
any numbers. We haven't created anything
yet.
And so,
well,
we could take nothing and we could
divide it into two sets, the empty lower
set and the empty upper set, I mean, the
two empty sets.
Um
and everything in the empty set is less
than everything in the empty set cuz
that's a vacuous statement. So, so we
we're
we satisfy the conditions, and we apply
the number generation rule, which says
we should create a new number. And this
is what I call the Big Bang of numbers,
the the surreal genesis, when the number
zero is born. Zero is the firstborn
number that is bigger than everything in
the empty set and less than everything
in the empty set.
Okay, but now we have this number zero.
And so, therefore,
we now can define new gaps. Because if
we put zero into the left set and have
an empty right set,
then we should create a new number
that's bigger than zero
and less than everything in the empty
set, and that number is called the
number one.
And similarly, at that same stage, the
we could we could have put zero into the
right set.
And so, that would be the firstborn
number that's less than zero, which is
called minus one.
So, now we have three numbers, minus
one, zero, and one. And they have four
gaps cuz there could be a number below
minus one, or between minus one and
zero, or between zero and one, or above
one.
And so, we create those four new
numbers. The first number above one is
called two. The first number between
zero and one is called one half. And
then on the negative side, we have minus
a half and minus two. And so on. So, now
we have what is that? Seven seven
numbers. So, there's eight gaps between
them. So, at the next birthday, they
call them, the next stage, will be born
all the numbers between those gaps. And
then between those, and between those,
and so on. And as the days progress, we
get more and more numbers. But those are
just the finite birthdays because, as I
said, it's a transfinite process. So, at
day omega, that's the first infinite
day,
we're going to create a lot of new
surreal numbers. So, every real number
will be born at that stage because every
real number fills a gap in the
previously born rational numbers that we
had just talked about.
It's not all the rationals because
actually the rational numbers that are
born at the finite stages are just the
rationals whose denominator is a power
of two, it turns out. Those are called
the dyadic rationals.
So, the real numbers are all born on day
omega, but also some other numbers are
born on day omega, namely
the ordinal omega itself is the
firstborn number that's bigger than all
those finite numbers. And minus omega is
the firstborn number that's less than
all those finite numbers.
But also, we have the number epsilon,
which is the firstborn number that's
strictly bigger than zero and strictly
less than all the positive rational
numbers. So, that's going to be an
infinitesimal number in that gap.
And so on. On day omega plus one, we get
more numbers, and then omega plus two,
and so on. And the numbers just keep
coming forever. So, this is how you
build the surreal number system.
And then it turns out you can define the
arithmetic operations of addition and
multiplication in a natural way that is
engaging with this recursive definition.
So, we have sort of recursive
definitions of plus and times for the
surreal numbers. And it turns out you
can prove
that they make the surreal numbers into
what's called an ordered field.
Uh so, they satisfy the field axioms,
which means that you have distributivity
and commutativity of addition and
multiplication. And also, you can
you have reciprocals for every nonzero
number, you can divide by the number.
So, you can add and multiply and divide
and subtract.
Um and furthermore, you can take square
roots. Um and furthermore, every
odd degree polynomial has a root,
which is true in the real numbers
because if you think about, say, a cubic
or a fifth degree polynomial,
then you know it's going to cross the
axis because it has opposite behaviors
on the two infinities.
Because it's an odd degree polynomial.
So, on the positive side, it's going to
the positive infinity. On the negative
side, it would be going to minus
infinity. So, it has to cross.
So, we know in the real numbers, every
odd degree polynomial has a root. And
that's also true in the surreal numbers.
So, that makes it what's called a real
closed field, um which is a very nice
mathematical theory. Um
so, it's really quite interesting uh how
we can find copies of all these other
systems inside the surreal numbers. But
the surreal numbers are fundamentally
discontinuous, as you wrote about. What
are the consequences of this? Right. So,
the surreal numbers have a property that
they form a nonstandard model of the
real field, which means that
they provide a notion of
infinitesimality that one can use to
develop calculus on the grounds of
Robinson's nonstandard theory that I had
mentioned earlier.
But they don't have the least upper
bound property for subcollections.
So, there's no set of surreal numbers,
no nontrivial set of surreal numbers has
a least upper bound.
And there are no convergent sequences in
the surreal numbers. And so,
for the sort of ordinary use in calculus
based on limits and convergence,
that method does not work in the surreal
numbers at all.
So, that's what I mean when I say the
surreal numbers are fundamentally
discontinuous. They they have a a
fundamental discontinuity going on.
But you can still do calculus with them
because you have infinitesimals if you
use these nonstandard
methods, the infinitesimal based methods
to calculus.
And people
and people do that.
I once organized a conference in New
York, and we had John Conway as a
speaker at that conference. And there
was a question session.
And someone asked him, I mean, it's a
bit rude question, I think,
um but they asked it. And the question
was,
"What is your greatest disappointment in
life?" I mean, I would never ask a
question like that at a conference in a
very public setting. But Conway was
extremely graceful,
and he answered by saying that
the surreal numbers, not the numbers
themselves, but the reception of the
surreal numbers,
because he had ambition that the surreal
numbers would become
a fundamental number system used
throughout mathematics and science
because it was able to do
nonstandard analysis, it was able to do
calculus, it unified the ordinals, and
so on. And it's such a unifying, amazing
structure, beautiful structure with
elegant proofs and sophisticated ideas
all around it.
And he was disappointed that it it
it never really achieved that unifying
status that he had the ambition for. And
this
he mentioned as his greatest
disappointment.
>> Yeah, Donald Knuth tried to celebrate it
it's uh but never quite took hold. So, I
don't want to give the impression though
that that the surreal numbers are not
widely studied because there's thousands
of people who are studying it. In fact,
Philip
Ehrlich, who is one of the world experts
on the surreal numbers, mentioned to me
once that Conway was his own worst enemy
with regard to that very issue
everything is a game.
And he treated the surreal numbers as a
kind of plaything, a toy.
And maybe that makes people not take it
seriously. Although, my view is that it
is extremely serious and useful and
profound.
And I'm I've been writing a whole series
of essays on the surreal numbers for my
Substack
at Infinitely More. And I just find the
whole subject so fascinating and and
beautiful.
I mean, it's true, I'm not applying it
in engineering, which maybe was
uh part of this Conway ambition. Uh and
I just wanted to, before I forget,
mention
the Conway
turning everything into a game. It is a
fascinating point I didn't quite think
about, which I think uh the game of life
is just an example of exploration of
cellular automata. I think cellular
automata is one of the most incredible,
complicated, fascinating It feels like
an open door into a world we have not
quite yet explored.
And it's such a beautiful illustration
of that world, the game of life. But
calling it a game, maybe life balances
it cuz that's a powerful word.
But uh it's not quite a game. It's a
fascinating invitation to an incredibly
complicated and fascinating mathematical
world.
I think uh every time I see cellular
automata, and the fact that we don't
quite have tools, mathematical tools,
to make sense of that world,
it uh fills me with awe. Speaking of a
thousand years from now, it feels like
that as a world we might uh make some
progress on. The game of life is a sort
of playground for computably undecidable
questions because in fact, you can prove
that the question of whether a given
cell will ever become alive
is computably undecidable. In other
words, given a configuration and you
ask, will this particular cell ever, you
know, be alive
in the evolution and you can prove that
that question is equivalent to the
halting problem. It's it's computably
undecidable. It's semi-decidable in the
sense that if it will become alive, then
you will know it at a finite stage
because you can just run the Game of
Life algorithm and let it run and if it
ever did come alive, you could say,
"Yeah, it was alive." But if you've run
it for a thousand years and it hasn't
come alive yet, then you don't
necessarily seem to have any basis for
saying, "No, it won't ever come alive."
If the behavior was very complicated,
maybe if you have a complete
understanding of the evolution of the
behavior, then you can say no, but you
can prove you won't always have that
understanding precisely because the
problem is equivalent to the halting
problem. And nevertheless, when you sit
back and look and visualize the thing,
some little mini cellular automata
civilizations are born and die quickly
and some are very predictable and
boring, but some have this rich
incredible complexity.
And maybe that speaks to a thing I
wanted to ask on the halting problem and
decidability.
You've mentioned this thing where if you
understand the program deeply, you might
be able to say something.
So, can we say something interesting
about maybe one statistically how many
programs
we know something about in terms of
whether they halt or not or what does it
mean to understand a program
deeply enough to be able to make a
prediction? The main lesson of
computability theory, in my view,
is that
it's never the case that you can have a
thorough understanding of the behavior
of a program by looking at the program
and that the content of what you learn
from a program, I mean, in the most
general case is always obtained just by
running it and looking at the behavior.
And and the proof of that is there's a
theorem called Rice's theorem which
makes that idea completely robust.
But I want to just take a little detour
towards another question riffing on
something that you just said,
namely, one can ask the question,
uh what is the behavior of a random
program?
So, you have some formal computing
language, you know, and you want to
you know, look at the collection of all
programs of a certain size. Maybe
there's only finitely many.
And
can you say something about the behavior
of a randomly chosen one like with a
certain likelihood it would have a
certain behavior?
And the answer turns out to be extremely
interesting.
Once years ago, Alexey Myasnikov asked
me a question.
He had this concept of a decision
problem with a black hole and what that
means is
it's a decision problem which is
possibly difficult in the worst case,
but the difficulty was concentrated in a
very tiny region called the black hole
and outside of that black hole, it was
very easy.
And so, for example, this kind of
problem is a terrible problem to use if
you're basing your encryption scheme,
you know, you don't want to use a black
hole problem because if someone can rob
the bank 95% of the time, you know, then
that's
not what you want or even any
non-trivial percent of the time is too
dangerous. So, so you don't want to use
problems that are,
you know, almost every case is easily
solved as the basis of your encryption.
And the question Alexey asked me was,
does the halting problem have a black
hole? Yeah. And so, if we take, say, the
standard model of Turing machines,
so, one-way infinite tape with zeros and
ones on the tape and so on, the head
moving back and forth and
you know, it stops when it gets into the
halt state,
then it turns out we proved that there
is a black hole and what that means is
there's a computable procedure that
decides correctly almost every instance
of the halting problem even though the
halting problem is not decidable.
We can decide almost every instance. So,
more precisely,
there's a collection of Turing machine
programs
such that
um we can easily decide whether programs
in that collection or not.
And for the programs in the collection,
um we can decide the halting problem for
those programs easily.
And furthermore, almost every program is
in the collection in the sense that as
the number of states goes to, you know,
becomes large, the proportion of
programs in the collection goes to 100%.
So, the
asymptotic density of the programs is
one.
And the proof is quite fascinating
because it's one of these situations
where the theorem sounds really
surprising, I think, to many people when
I first tell it. I mean, to
computability experts,
then it's sort of intriguing to think
that you can solve almost every instance
of a halting problem.
Um but then when they hear the proof,
it's completely a letdown.
Unfortunately, nobody likes the theorem
after the proof. And so, the proof is so
simple though. If you know what a Turing
machine, how a Turing machine operates,
there's this infinite paper tape on
which the machine writes zeros and ones
and the head moves back and forth
according to
rigid instructions. And the instructions
are all of the form,
"If the machine is in such and such a
state and it's reading such and such
symbol on the tape, then it should write
this symbol on the tape and it should
change to this new state specified and
it should either move left or right as
specified."
So, a program consists of instructions
like that.
If you look at
look at a program,
you know, one of the states is the halt
state and that's when the program halts.
You can calculate how many
programs
don't have any instruction that
transitions to the halt state.
You can easily calculate the proportion.
And in the limit, it goes to 1 over e
squared, 13 and 1/2%. If you calculate
the limit.
The proportion of programs with n states
that don't ever halt because they don't
have any instruction saying halt,
those programs obviously never halt
because they can't halt. They don't have
any instruction that says halt. So, 13%
of programs, you can say
>> 13% you can say they don't halt because
you just look at them and you can
understand them. There's no they never
they never change to the halt state, so
they can't halt.
>> I mean, that nevertheless is beautiful
to to know, to to show. So, that's a
kind of trivial reason for non-halting,
you know? And when I first made that
observation, I thought, "Okay, this is
the proof strategy cuz we wanted I
wanted to say at first, the goal was,
"Look, that's a stupid reason for a
program not to halt and I just want to
pile up as many stupid reasons as I can
think of until it gets more than 50% and
then I can say most."
Yeah. That was my goal.
Yeah. So, we thought more about it
though.
And we hit the jackpot because we found
one gigantic stupid reason that
converged to 100%.
I mean, in the limit. And so, and the
the the stupid reason for a program not
to halt is that
well, if you think about the behavior,
say, the head is sitting there. It's on
the leftmost cell of the tape at the
very beginning. It's in the start state
and the head is following an instruction
and the instruction says, "When you're
in the start state, which it is, and
you're reading something on the tape,
then you should write something and you
should change to a new state and you
should either move left and right, left
or right."
But half of them move left.
But if you move left and you are already
at the end, then the head falls off.
And so, the conversation stops because
the head fell off the tape.
That's a pretty stupid reason. Okay, but
that's half of them already just like
that. Okay, and then some of them went
right and they changed to a new state
and amongst those, you know, the new
state, half of those ones are going left
and half are going right from that
place.
And then most of those are changing to a
new state. When there's a lot of states,
it's very likely that the next state
that you transition to is new.
And so, you get this random walk
behavior if you know what that means
where half go left and half go right at
each step. And there's a theorem due to
Polya which is called the Polya
recurrence theorem which says,
"When you have a random walk, a
one-dimensional random walk, then it's
very likely to come back to where you
started." And when that happens for us,
then half of them from that place fall
off on the next step.
And so, you can show using this kind of
uh analysis that the probability one
behavior of a random Turing machine is
that the head falls off the tape before
it repeats a state.
And that is the stupid proof that shows
how to solve the halting problem because
when that happens, we can answer the
halting problem saying,
"No, the computation stopped because the
machine crashed, not because it halted.
So, therefore, it doesn't count as
halting on some accounts." Or, you know,
if you want to define that as halting,
crashing as halting,
then but in any case, however it is that
you set up your formalism, you're going
to be able to answer the question for
the behavior of the machine
when the head falls off. So,
statistically, in the limit, you solve
the halting problem. Yes, exactly.
Computably solve it, you know. What do
we take from that?
Because you didn't solve the halting
problem. No, it's impossible to fully
solve the halting problem correctly in
all cases. That's pretty cool. That's
kind of I mean, I don't know. That's
just
>> way. I mean, it's probabilistic in the
sense that
we're solving almost all instances Yeah.
computably. There's versions of this
that are maybe more interesting from the
point of view of complexity theory and
actually useful. I mean, there's the
whole P and P problem and so on and
there's this genre of NP-complete
problems which are
problems that are infeasible
they would take exponential time to
solve them in the ordinary way and
they're not known to be polynomial time
solvable, although in these cases it's
an open question whether there is a
polynomial time algorithm feasible
algorithm.
And for
most uh for most of the NP-complete
problems
you can prove um that there's a
polynomial time approximation that
solves almost all instances in a
feasible amount of time. So, like the
knapsack problem, you know, packing
problems and so on, other kinds of
problems, satisfaction problem when
depending on how you set up the
formalism you can prove and and I've
proven many instances of this um but
also I think it's widespread. Uh for
almost all the NP-complete problems, the
difficult problems, and these are
important problems for industrial
application one, these are problems that
we actually want to solve.
Um we can have feasible algorithms that
solve almost every instances of them.
The amount of fields and topics you've
worked on it is truly incredible. But I
have to ask about P versus NP. This is
one of the big open problems in
complexity theory. So, for people who
don't know, it's about the relationship
between computation time and problem
complexity. Do you think it will ever be
solved? And is there any chance the
weird counterintuitive
thing might be true that P equals NP?
Yeah, that's an interesting question.
Sometimes people ask about whether it
could be independent, which I think is
an interesting question for logicians.
Um
and of course, well, one has to say, if
you're entertaining the idea of
independence
uh
you know, over which theory? Cuz every
statement is going to be independent
over an extremely weak theory. So,
that's you know, it doesn't make sense
to say it's independent all by itself.
You're only independent relative to a
theory, right? So, the way I think about
P and P is that
I mean, of course, it's a theoretical
question about
the asymptotic behavior of these
problems. I mean
for a problem to be in P means that
there you know, there is a a computable
decision procedure that
that runs in time bounded by some
polynomial. But the coefficients on that
polynomial could be enormous.
And the degree could be incredibly high
and
um and so for small values of inputs,
then it doesn't make sense to talk about
this polynomial time feasibility with
respect to
say the
the range of problem inputs that we will
ever give it in our lifetime or in the
span of human civilization or whatever.
I mean
because it's an asymptotic property.
It's really in the limit as the size of
the inputs goes to infinity. That's the
only time that polynomial or NP becomes
relevant.
And so maybe it's important to keep that
in mind and sometimes you find
kind of overblown remarks about made
about
you know, if P equal NP, then this will
be incredibly important for human
civilization because it means that we'll
have feasible algorithms for solving
these incredibly important problems in
NP, you know, that uh
you know, it would cause immense wealth
for human societies and so on because we
would be able to solve these otherwise
intractable problems and that would be
the basis of new technology and industry
and so forth. I mean, people make these
kind of remarks, but
>> you have to temper those remarks by the
realization that
P and P equal NP or P not equal NP are
not about these practical things at all
because of the asymptotic nature of the
question itself. Okay, that's on the one
hand, but on the second hand, we already
have the algorithm. So, we could use it
already, except it's a terrible
algorithm because it it it involves all
this incredible amount of coding and so
on.
>> And uh on the third hand, like you said,
we already have approximation algorithms
that uh Yes. that from a pragmatic
perspective
solve all the actual real engineering
problems of of of human civilization.
Like the SAT solvers work amazingly
well, you know, in lots and lots of
cases, even though we can prove that we
don't expect if P is not equal to NP,
then there won't be a polynomial time
SAT solver, but the actually the SAT
solver approximations, you know, are
really quite amazing.
Sorry to ask the ridiculous question,
but who is the greatest mathematician of
all time?
Who are the possible candidates? Euler,
Gauss, Newton, Ramanujan, Hilbert, you
mentioned uh Gödel, Turing, if you throw
them into the bucket. So, this is I
think an incredibly difficult question
to
answer. I mean, I personally I don't
really
think this way about sort of ranking the
mathematicians
by greatness.
So, you don't have like, you know, some
people have like a Taylor Swift poster
in their dorm room. You don't have a
I mean, if you force me to pick someone,
it would probably be Archimedes because
>> he has such incredible achievements in
such an early
era
which
totally transcended the work of the
other people in his era. So,
but I also have the view that I want to
learn mathematics and gain mathematical
insight from whoever can provide it and
wherever I can find it. And and this
isn't always just coming from the
greats. And sometimes the greats are
doing things that are just first and
not, you know, somebody else could have
easily been first. And so, there's a
kind of luck aspect to it. When you go
back and look at, you know, the
achievements and because of this
progress issue in mathematics that we
talked about earlier, namely we really
do understand things much better now
than they used to. And when you look
back at the achievement that had been
made, then maybe you can imagine, you
know, thinking
well, you know, somebody else could have
could have had that insight also. Um and
and maybe they would have It's already a
known phenomenon that disparate
mathematicians end up proving
essentially similar results at
approximately the same time.
But okay, the person who did it first is
getting the credit and so on. What do
you make of that cuz I see that
sometimes when
mathematicians, this also applies in
physics and science
where completely separately
discoveries are made maybe at a very
similar time. What does that mean? It's
relatively common. I mean, I think it's
like certain ideas are in the air and
being thought about but not fully
articulated and so
this is the nature of growth in
knowledge. Do you understand where ideas
come from? Not really. I mean, what
what's your own process when you're
thinking through a problem?
Yeah, that's another difficult question.
I suppose it has to do with I mean, my
mathematical style, my style as a
mathematician is that
I don't really like difficult
mathematics.
What I love is
simple, clear, easy to understand
arguments that prove a surprising
result. That's my favorite situation.
And actually, so the question of whether
it's a new result or not is somehow less
important to me and and so that has to
do with this question of the greats and
so on, whoever does it first. Because I
think, for example, if you prove a new
result with a with a
a bad argument or complicated argument
that's great cuz you proved something
new, but I still want to see the
beautiful simple
cuz that's what I can understand. Also
I mean, I'm kind of naturally skeptical
about any complicated argument because
it might be wrong. Mhm. If I can't
really understand it fully, like every
single step all at once in my head then
I'm just worried maybe it's wrong. And
so there's different styles. Sometimes
mathematicians get involved with these
enormous research projects that involve
huge numbers of working parts and
different technology coming together. I
mean, mathematical technology, not
physical technology. And sometimes it
actually involves now more and more
something like the lean programming
language where some parts are automated.
So, you have these I see. Well, that's
another issue because maybe those things
are you know,
less subject to skepticism when it's
validated by lean.
But I'm thinking about the case where
the arguments are just extremely
complicated and so I sort of worry
whether it's right or not. Whereas, you
know, I like the simple thing and so
so I tend to have often worked on things
that are a little bit off the beaten
path from what other people are working
on from that point of view. Your
curiosity draws you towards simplicity.
I want to work on the things that I can
understand and that are simple
and
and luckily I've found that I've been
able to make contributions that other
people seem to like, you know, in this
way, in this style. And so, I've been
kind of fortunate from that point of
view.
I mean, my process always though and um
I've recommended this always to my
students uh
is just a kind of playful curiosity. So,
whenever I have whenever there's an idea
or a topic
uh
then I just play around with it and
change little things or understand a
basic case and then make it more
complicated or press things a little bit
on this side or apply the idea to my
favorite example uh you know, that's
relevant or and see what happens or you
just play around with ideas and this
often leads to insights that then lead
to more methods or more, you know, then
pretty soon you're making progress on
the problem.
And so this is basically my method is I
just, you know, fool around with the
ideas until I can see a path through uh
towards something interesting and then
prove that. Um and that's worked
extremely well for me, so I'm pretty
pleased with that method.
>> Do you do like thought experiments where
you anthropomorphize like you mentioned?
Yeah, yeah. So this is a basic tool. I
mean I use this all the time. You know,
you imagine a set-theoretic model, a
model of ZFC as like
a place where you're living and you
might travel to distant lands by forcing
and this is a kind of metaphor for
what's going on. Of course, you know,
the actual arguments aren't anything
like that cuz there's not land and
you're not traveling and you're not
>> But you allow your mind to visualize
that kind of thing in the actual world.
>> you to understand. Particularly when
there's parts of the argument that are
in tension with one another, then you
can imagine that people are fighting or
something and those kind of metaphors,
you know, or you imagine it in terms of
a game-theoretic, you know, two players
trying to win. So that's kind of
tension. And and those kind of
metaphorical ways of understanding a
mathematical problem often are extremely
helpful in realizing, "Aha, the enemy is
going to pick this thing to be like that
because, you know,
it makes it more continuous or whatever
and then we should do this other thing
in order to So it it makes you realize
mathematical strategies for finding the
answer and proving the theorem that you
want to prove because of the the ideas
that come out of that
anthropomorphization.
What do you think of uh somebody like
Andrew Wiles who spent 7 years grinding
at one of the hardest problems in the
history of mathematics? And maybe
contrasting that a little bit with
somebody who's also brilliant, Terence
Tao, who basically says if
if he hits a wall, he just switches to a
different problem, maybe he comes back
and so on, so it's less of a focused
grind for many years without any
uh guarantee that you'll get there,
which is what Andrew Wiles went through.
Maybe Grigori Perelman did the same.
I mean Wiles proved an amazing theorem.
The Fermat's Last Theorem result is
incredible.
Um
this is a totally different style than
my own practice, though, of working in
isolation. I mean for me, mathematics is
often a kind of social activity. I have
I
counted I mean it's pushing towards 100
collaborators, co-authors on various
papers and so on and
you know, anybody has an idea they want
to talk about with me. If I'm interested
in it, then I'm going to want to
collaborate with them and we might solve
the problem and have a joint paper or
whatever. You want to have a joint
paper? Yeah, exactly. Let's go.
So my approach to like making
mathematical progress tends to involve
working with other people quite a lot
rather than just working on my own and I
enjoy that aspect very much. So I
personally, I couldn't ever do what
Wiles did. Maybe I'm missing out. Maybe
if I locked myself, you know, in the
bedroom and just worked on whatever,
then
the I would solve it, but I tend to
think that no, actually like being
on MathOverflow so much and I've gotten
so many ideas, so many papers have grown
out of
the MathOverflow conversations and back
and forth. Someone posts an an you know,
someone posts a question and I post an
answer on part of it and then someone
else has an idea and it turns into a
full solution and then we have a
three-way paper coming out of that.
That's happened many times.
And so for me, it's
I enjoy this kind of social aspect to it
and
it's not just the social part, rather
that's the nature of mathematical
investigation as I see it is
putting forth mathematical ideas to
other people and they respond to it in a
way that helps me learn, helps them
learn and I think that's a very
productive way of undertaking
mathematics. I think it's
uh when you work solo on mathematics
from my outsider perspective, it seems
terrifyingly lonely.
It because you're especially if you do
stick to a single problem, especially if
that problem has broken many brilliant
mathematicians in the past, that you're
really putting all your chips in and
just the torment, the roller coaster of
day to uh day because I imagine
you have these moments of hopeful break
many breakthroughs
and then
you have to deal with the occasional
realization that no, it was not a
breakthrough and that disappointment.
Right. And then you have to go like
a weekly, maybe daily disappointment
where you hit a wall and you have no
other person to
brainstorm with, you have no other
um
avenue to pursue and it's
I I don't know. The mental fortitude
takes to go through that. But every
every everybody's different. Some people
are recluse and just really
uh find solace in that
lone grind.
Uh I have to ask about uh Grisha
Perelman.
What do you think of him famously
declining the Fields Medal and the
Millennium Prize?
So he stated, "I'm not interested in
money or fame. The prize is completely
irrelevant to me. If the proof is
correct, then no other recognition is
needed."
What do you think of him turning down
the prize? I guess what I think is that
mathematics is full of a lot of
different kinds of people. And my
attitude is that, "Hey, it doesn't
matter. Maybe they have a good math idea
and so I want to talk to them and
interact with them." And so I think the
Perelman case, you know, it
is a is maybe an instance where the
you know, he's
such a brilliant mind and he solved this
extremely famous and difficult problem
and that is a huge achievement. Um
but he also had these views about, you
know, prizes and somehow I don't really
fully understand why he would turn it
down. I I do think uh I have a similar
thing just observing Olympic athletes
that are in many cases don't get paid
very much and they nevertheless dedicate
their entire lives for the pursuit of
the gold medal. I think his case is a
reminder
that some of the greatest
mathematicians, some of the greatest
scientists and human beings
do the thing they do, take on these
problems
for the love
of it. Not for the prizes or the money
or any of that. Now, as you're saying,
if the money comes, you can use it for
stuff. If the prizes come and the fame
and so on, that might be useful.
But the reason fundamentally the greats
do it is because
of the art itself. Sure, I totally agree
with that. I mean I share the view.
That's, you know, that's why I'm a
mathematician. Uh
is because I find the questions so
compelling and I've spent my whole life
thinking about these problems and um
b-
you know, but
like if I won an award, Yeah, it's
great. It's great. I mean I'm I'm pretty
sure you don't contribute to
MathOverflow for the for the wealth and
and the
and the power.
That's right.
I mean it's yeah, genuine genuine
curiosity. Well, you asked who the
greatest mathematician is and
um
and
uh and of course if we want to be truly
objective about it, we would need a kind
of objective criteria about how to
evaluate the relative, you know,
strength in the reputation of various
mathematicians and so of course we
should use MathOverflow score because
They're your definitive I mean, nobody
objectively the greatest mathematician
of all time.
Uh I've also argued that tenure and
promotion decisions should be based
based on MathOverflow. So my daughter
introduced me to
uh her boyfriend and told me that she
had a boyfriend.
And I
uh asked him what his MathOverflow is.
>> first of all, what is his chess rating
and secondly, what is his MathOverflow
score? Oh man. But that's the only way
to judge a person, I think. That's I
think objectively correct. Yeah.
[Laughter]
I mean since you bring it up, chess, I
got to ask you about infinite chess. I
can't let you go. You've I mean you
worked on a million things, but infinite
chess is one of them. Uh somebody asked
on MathOverflow the mathematical
definition of a chess So can we talk
about the math of chess and the math of
infinite chess? What is infinite chess?
>> Oh yeah, absolutely. Infinite chess,
fantastic.
Chess ordinarily is played on this tiny
tiny board, this 8 by 8 board, right? So
when you play chess normally, it's on
the 8 by 8 board. But we want to play
infinite chess. So on the
on the integer board, it's infinite in
all four directions, you know, but it
still has the chessboard pattern.
And maybe there's pieces on this board,
maybe infinitely many pieces we allow.
But one difference from finite ordinary
chess, in in infinite chess, we don't
play from a standard starting position.
Rather, you
the interesting situation is that you
present a position where there's a lot
of pieces already on the board in a
complicated way and you say, "What would
it be like to start from this position
or from that one?" You know, and we want
to produce positions that have
interesting features, meaning
mathematically interesting features.
And so I can tell you
uh for example,
probably a lot of people are familiar
with the um
say the mate in two genre of chess
problem. You know, you have a chess
problem and it's white to mate in two,
which means
that white is going to make two moves,
but the second move is going to be a
checkmate. Or maybe mate in three or
mate in five, or whatever. We can have
mate in N positions for any N. I mean,
in infinite chess
you can create a position
which is not mate in N for any N, but
white has a winning strategy that will
win in finally many moves.
So, in other words Mhm. Let me say it
again. There are positions in infinite
chess that white can definitely win
in finally many moves. White is going to
make checkmate.
But, there's no particular N for which
white can guarantee to win in N moves.
There's no N. No N. So, it's not mate in
N for any N, but it's a white win
in finally many. The way to think about
it is white is going to win, but black
controls how long it takes. Ah. Got it.
But, it's doomed. Black can say, "Well,
I know you're going to win, but this
time it's going to you're going to take
a thousand moves at least." And or maybe
in a different way of playing black can
say, "Well, I know you're going to win,
but this time you're going to have to
take a million moves."
For any number, black can say that. So,
it's these really interesting positions.
This is a position in my first infinite
chess paper. So, it's black to play in
this position, and
if black doesn't move that that rook
there
then white is going to checkmate pretty
quickly.
By the way, can we describe the rules of
infinite chess? Right. So, the rules of
infinite chess are that there's just the
ordinary pieces, and they move on this
infinite board, which is just a
chessboard, but extended in all
directions infinitely with no edge. So,
there's no boundary.
But, the pieces move just like you'd
expect. So, the the knights move just
the same, and the rooks move, you know,
on the ranks and files, and the bishops
move on the same colored diagonals, and
just like you would expect, except they
can move as far as they want, you know,
if there's no intervening piece in the
way.
Um The one thing is that Okay, so the
white pawns always move upwards, and the
black pawns always move downwards, but
when they're capturing
the pawns you know, capture on the
diagonal. So, I think the piece movement
is pretty clear.
There's a couple of differences that you
have to pay attention to from ordinary
chess. For example
um there's this threefold repetition
rule in ordinary chess, but we just we
just get rid of this for infinite chess
because of course threefold repetition
is just a proxy for infinite play. The
real rule is infinite play is a draw,
not threefold repetition is a draw.
That's just a kind of convenient
approximation to the what I view as the
actual rule, which is that infinite play
is a draw. So, the only way to win is to
make checkmate on the board at a finite
stage of play, and if you play
infinitely, you haven't done that, and
so it's a draw. And the pawns can be
converted to
>> no promotion cuz there's no edge, right?
Exactly. And this position that we were
just talking about is a position with
game value omega, which means that
because it has an ordinal value, white
is going to win
but black can play as though counting
down from omega. What is the nature of
counting down from omega?
If you're black and you need to count
down from omega, then
you have to say a finite number
>> Mhm. and then after that it's going to
be at most that many numbers afterwards
to count down, right? So, the nature of
counting down from omega is that
you take this giant step on the first
count and then after that you subtract
one each time. You can't subtract one
from omega because that's not an
ordinal. So, if you come down from
omega, you have to go to some finite
number, and then if you just subtract
one each time, then that's how many more
moves you get.
>> Mhm. So, that's the sense in which black
can make it take as long as he wants
because he can pick his initial number
to be whatever he wants. By the way, I I
just noticed that you're citing a math
overflow question, which is really cool.
That's right. Yeah, this my interest in
infinite chess was born on math overflow
cuz someone asked this question. Noam
Elkies asked this question. That's so
cool to see a math overflow citation in
in an archive paper. That's cool.
How do you construct
the position
Right.
>> that satisfies this? Is there algorithm
for construction? No. This is an act of
mathematical creativity really to come
up with I had a co-author, my co-author
Corey Evans. He's a national
a US national master chess player,
very strong chess player.
Um he's also a philosophy professor of
law. Your collaborations are wonderful.
That's great. So, I met him because he
was a grad student at CUNY where I was
at the time in New York, and also he was
my son's chess coach for when my son was
playing chess competitively in
elementary school
then Corey was the coach,
and so we knew him that way, and
and that was right around the time when
I was getting interested in infinite
chess, and I knew I needed a chess
knowledgeable
partner, and so Corey was invaluable for
the paper because
the proofs in this chess in infinite
chess are extremely finicky because you
create these positions
but the details of the argument have to
do with kind of chess reasoning, you
know, like and and my chess reading
wasn't quite
up to it
because I would create the positions.
Um almost all the positions are ones
that I made, but the but this is like
after many generations of being
corrected by Corey because Corey would
come and say, "Hey, you know, this pawn
is hanging, and it breaks your argument,
and
you know, this bishop can leak out of
the cage, or whatever." And and so
uh
and so the process was
I knew kind of in terms of these
ordinals what we needed to create with
the position, and I would struggle to do
it and create something that's sort of
had the features that I wanted, and then
I would show it to Corey, and he would
say, "Look, it doesn't work because of
this and that, and so on." And so, this
kind of back and forth was extremely
helpful to me, and eventually we, you
know, converged on arguments that were
correct. Um and
so, it's yeah, it's quite interesting.
Also, maybe another thing to say is the
the follow-up paper to this one was a
three-way paper with also Corey and
myself and my PhD student Norman
Promotor, in which we improved the
bounds. So, we were aiming to produce
more and more chess positions with
higher and higher ordinal values. So the
initial position was value omega, and
then we made omega squared and omega
cubed in the in the first paper, and
then in this three-way collaboration, we
made omega to the fourth. The title of
the paper is a position in infinite
chess with game value omega to the
fourth. Right. And so, at the time this
was the best known results, the sort of
state of the art. But, since that time
it's been improved now dramatically.
And in fact, we know now that every
countable ordinal arises as the game
value of a position in infinite chess.
So, it's fantastic result.
Before I forget, let me ask about
your views on AI and LLMs.
They're getting
better and better at mathematics, and
you we've spoken about collaborators,
and you have so many collaborators.
Do you see
AI as a potential great collaborator to
you as a mathematician, and what do you
think the future role of those kinds of
AI systems is? I guess I would draw a
distinction between, you know, what we
have currently and what might come in
future years. I've played around with
it, and I've tried um experimenting, you
know, but I haven't found it helpful at
all, basically zero. It's not
it's not helpful to me. And you know,
I've used various systems and so on, the
paid models and so on, and um my typical
experience is interacting with AI on a
mathematical question is that
it gives me garbage answers that are not
mathematically correct.
>> Mhm. And
and so I find that not helpful and also
frustrating. Like, if I was interacting
with a person you know, that the
frustrating thing is when you have to
argue about whether or not, you know
that argument that they gave you is
right, and you point out exactly the
error, and the AI saying, "Oh, it's
totally fine." And and
you know, if if I were having such an
experience with a person, I would simply
refuse to talk to that person again.
But, okay, one has to overlook these
kind of flaws, and so I tend to be a
kind of skeptic about the value of the
current value of the current AI systems
as far as mathematical reasoning is
concerned. It seems not reliable. Um
okay, but I know for a fact that many
that there are several prominent
mathematicians who I have enormous
respect for who are saying that they are
using it in a way that's helpful, and
I'm
often very surprised to hear that based
on my own experience, which is quite the
opposite. Uh and so
maybe my process isn't any good,
although, you know, I I use it for other
things like you know, for programming
things, or for image generation, and so
on. It's amazingly powerful and helpful.
But, for mathematical arguments, I
haven't found it helpful, and maybe I'm
not
interacting with it in a in the right
way yet, or it could be.
And so, maybe I just need to improve my
skill. But, also maybe I wonder like
these
examples that are provided by other
people maybe involved quite a huge
amount of interaction and so I wonder if
maybe the mathematical ideas are really
coming from the person, you know, these
great mathematicians who are doing it
rather than the AI and and so so I tend
to be kind of skeptical. But also
I'm skeptical for another reason and
that is
because of the nature of the
the large language model approach to AI
doing mathematics.
[Music]
I recognize that the AI is trying to
give me an argument that sounds like a
proof rather than an argument that is a
proof. The motivation
is misplaced.
And and so I I worry that this is a very
dangerous source of error because it
often happens in mathematics that I mean
if I think back to when I was an
undergrad, you know, here at Caltech and
I was a math major eventually and
at that time LaTeX was a pretty new
thing and I was learning LaTeX and so I
was typing up my homeworks in LaTeX and
they looked beautiful. Actually, they
looked like garbage from my current
standards. I'm sure it was terrible
except at the time, you know, I didn't
know anything. I was an undergrad and
LaTeX was sort of unheard of and so I
was producing these beautifully typeset
problem sets, solutions and so on. And
and I would print it up and submit it
and so on and the grades would come back
terrible grades
and and I realized what was happening is
that
the
you know, the the copy was so beautiful
mathematically typeset in this way. It
looked like the kind of mathematics you
find in a book, you know, because
basically that's the only time you saw
that kind of mathematical typesetting
was in a
you know, professional, you know,
published book and those meant that
mathematics was almost always correct in
a book, right? And so I had somehow, you
know, lost my
critical
because it was so beautiful and I was
used to only seeing that kind of
typesetting when an argument was, you
know, totally right and wasn't critical
enough and making these sort of bonehead
mistakes in the proofs and and so okay,
so I corrected this of course. But this
kind of effect is very much real with
the modern LM system.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And so I think that
that the chat programs and so on are
producing these arguments that look
really
they look like a that's what they're
striving to do. That it's what they're
designed to do. They're not designed to
make
a logically correct argument. They're
designed to make something that looks
like a logically correct argument and
it's easy to get fooled if you're not
skeptical. And so that's why I worry a
bit when people rely on AI for
mathematical arguments.
I mean using tying them to lean in the
formal proof
verification systems and so on. This is
a totally different way of operating.
But for the sort of ordinary person
sitting down and using chat to come up
with a mathematical argument,
I think it's a dangerous source of error
if you're not especially attuned to this
very issue that the the AI is going to
produce something that's not grounded in
mathematical understanding but rather
something that is
trying to look like something that is
grounded in mathematical understanding
and those are not the same thing at all.
And
furthermore, I really wonder if one can
make a kind of system for producing
genuine mathematical insight that isn't
based
in what I would view as mathematical
understanding as opposed to
the text generation systems. The methods
that are used, yeah, they don't seem
close enough grounded in understanding
of the underlying mathematical concepts
but rather
grounded in the way words appear on a
page in arguments about those concepts
which are not the same. So there's a
couple of things to say there. So one,
I think there is a real skill in
providing the LM system with enough
information
to be a good collaborator yeah, cuz
you're really are dealing with a
difference. It's not a human being. You
really have to load in everything you
possibly can
from your body of work, from the way
you're thinking and that's a real skill.
And then the other thing is
you know, for me if it's at all anything
like programming because I I have a lot
of
uh colleagues and friends who are
programmers who kind of feel similarly
to you.
And for me I've gotten better and better
and better at giving
uh as much information as possible to
the systems in in a really structured
way. Maybe because I just like natural
language as a way to express
my thinking.
And then the benefit comes from the
inspiration that the system can provide
by its ability to
know a lot of things and make
connections between disparate fields and
between disparate concepts. And that way
it provides
not the answer but the inspiration, the
hand-holding, the camaraderie that helps
me get to the answer because it does
know a lot more than me. Know, like
knowledge.
And if you give it a lot of information
and ask the broader questions
uh it can make you some really beautiful
um connections. But I do find that I
have to be extremely patient. Like you
said, the
the the amount of times it'll do
something dumb where I feel like I you
don't get this at all, do you?
That's a source of a lot of frustration
for us humans. Like
wait, this thing doesn't understand at
all. If you can have the patience to
look past that
there might be some brilliant little
um
insights that it can provide.
At least at least for me in the realm of
programming, I should say programming
there's just so much training data.
There's so much there.
And
uh at least I see the light at the end
of the tunnel of promising
uh possibilities of it being a good
collaborator versus like
something that gives you really true
genius level insights. Right. It's
probably true.
I also find it likely that a lot of the
as far as mathematical training data is
concerned
I just have to assume that math overflow
answers are part of the training data.
It's so And you're
I mean you're talking to yourself.
[Laughter]
Um
Sorry for the ridiculously big question.
But what idea in mathematics
is most beautiful to you? We've talked
about so many.
The most beautiful idea in mathematics
is the transfinite ordinals. These were
the number system invented by Georg
Cantor about counting beyond infinity.
Just the idea of counting beyond
infinity.
I mean you count through the ordinary
numbers, the natural numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3
and so on and then
you're not done because after that comes
omega and then omega plus one and omega
plus two and so on. And you can always
add one.
And so of course after you count through
all those numbers of the form omega plus
n, then you get to
omega plus omega, the first number after
all those.
And then comes omega plus omega plus one
and so on. You can always add one. And
so you can just keep counting through
the ordinals. It never ends. Eventually
you get to omega times three, omega
times four and so on and then the limit
of those numbers, the first number that
comes after all those numbers will be
omega squared and this one is the first
compound limit ordinal because it's a
limit ordinal is one of these numbers,
an ordinal that doesn't have an
immediate predecessor like omega and
omega times two, omega times three.
Those are all limit ordinals.
But omega squared is a limit ordinal but
it's also a limit of limit ordinals
because the omega times three, omega
times four and so on. Those are all
limit ordinals that limit up to omega
squared.
And then of course you form omega
squared plus one and then omega squared
plus two and so on and it never stops
and it's just absolutely beautiful and
amazing and furthermore forms the
foundation for these transfinite
recursive constructions that came later
and starting with the Cantor-Bendixson
theorem that I mentioned
um
and
uh continuing with uh
the construction of the of the V
hierarchy and Gödel's constructible
universe is built this way and
uh Zermelo's proof of the well-order
principle using the axiom of choice is a
transfinite recursive construction and
and so the idea of just counting past
the infinity is so simple and elegant
and has led to so much fascinating
mathematics.
Yeah, the infinity is not the end. And
what about philosophy?
What is the most beautiful idea in
philosophy?
So I do I have a foot in both fields,
philosophy and mathematics and
in some contexts I seem to
be required to choose whether I'm a
mathematician or a philosopher. I mean
my training is in mathematics. My PhD,
all my degrees are mathematics. But
somehow I turned myself into a
philosopher over the years because my
mathematical work was engaging with
these philosophical issues.
Um and so when I went in New York, I had
appointments first in mathematics only
but then eventually I was also joining
the philosophy faculty
at the Graduate Center. And when I went
to Oxford for the first time, my main
appointment was in philosophy, and
that's also true now
at Notre Dame.
Um although I'm also a concurrent
professor in mathematics. And I have
math PhD students still and philosophy
PhD students, and so
I don't really
care to decide whether I'm a
mathematician or philosopher, and my
work is engaging with mathematics and
with philosophical issues in mathematics
and with plain philosophy. And there's
this ample
region between these region between
these two subjects, so it's not
necessary to choose.
I remember when I first went to Oxford
and I told my daughter that I was going
to become professor of philosophy in
Oxford.
Um and she looked at me plaintively and
said, "Uh
but but papa, you're not a philosopher."
Because in her mind, you know, her
father was the mathematician and her
mother was the philosopher cuz my wife,
Barbara, is a
um philosopher.
Now also at Notre Dame, we're together
there. And
uh
Okay, but uh fortunately, I don't really
have to choose be between them. So you
ask about the most beautiful idea in
philosophy, and I would have to say
that uh
I think it's the distinction between
truth and proof, the one that we
discussed already.
Um
it's
it's so profound
and
gets at the heart of so many
philosophical issues. I mean, of course,
this is a distinction that's maybe born
in mathematics or mathematical logic,
but that's already already philosophical
to a degree, and it's, you know,
fundamentally a philosophical
distinction.
That truth is about the
the nature of the world and the way
things are. It's about objective reality
in a sense, whereas proof is about our
understanding of the world and about how
we come to know the things that we know
about the world.
And so to focus on proof is to focus on
the interaction that we have with
the objective reality. And okay, I'm
talking about the reality of
mathematics, not the physical world,
because as I said, I live in the
platonic realm and I interact with
mathematical reality. And so proof is
about the interaction uh and how we come
to know the facts that are true in this
mathematical reality. Whereas truth is
about what's really the case, sort of
apart from our knowledge of it. And
um and this is I think a
such a
core way of that I have of understanding
the world and uh and the nature of logic
and reasonings. And the gap between the
two is full of fascinating mysteries
both in the platonic realm,
but also in the physics realm and uh I
would even say in the in the human
psychology, sociology, politics,
geopolitics, all of it.
But if you think about proof more
generally, which is the process of
discovery
uh versus
the truth itself.
And that's our journey, uh whatever
field we're in.
Well, I for one am grateful for uh
for how marvelous of a philosopher,
mathematician, and human being you are.
It's truly an honor to speak with you
today. Well, thanks so much. It's such a
pleasure to be here, and thank you for
inviting me.
Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Joel David Hamkins.
To support this podcast, please check
out our sponsors in the description,
where you can also find links to contact
me, ask questions, get feedback, and so
on.
Thank you for listening,
as always.
Happy New Year.
I love you all.